Abstract syntax tree Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Abstract syntax tree
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 An abstract syntax tree (AST) is a tree representation of the abstract syntactic structure of source code written in a programming language, in which each node denotes a construct occurring in the source code, such as expressions, statements, or declarations, while omitting redundant details like punctuation, parentheses, and layout that do not contribute to the program's semantics. Unlike a concrete syntax tree, which captures the full details of the parse including all tokens and syntactic categories from the grammar, an AST simplifies this by eliminating intermediate nonterminals, precedence rules, and associativity, focusing solely on the essential hierarchical structure of the program. This abstraction arises from an abstract grammar that closely mirrors the language's constructs, where the AST serves as the derivation tree for that grammar.
ASTs play a central role in the compilation and interpretation process by separating the parsing phase, which produces the tree from concrete syntax, from subsequent stages like semantic analysis, optimization, and code generation, thereby enabling modular and efficient processing. For instance, in compilers, ASTs facilitate global optimizations and inter-procedural analysis by providing a clean, navigable structure of the code. In practice, interpreters such as Python's use ASTs to execute programs directly, while tools leverage them for static analysis (e.g., type checking with mypy), code transformation (e.g., transpilation via Babel), and editing features like autocompletion in IDEs. Nodes in an AST are often annotated with source positions to support accurate error reporting during analysis.

Fundamentals

Definition and purpose

An abstract syntax tree (AST) is a tree data structure used in compiler design to represent the syntactic structure of source code, where each node denotes a construct such as an expression, statement, or declaration, while omitting superficial details like whitespace, punctuation, and grouping symbols that do not affect semantics. This abstraction focuses on the essential hierarchical organization of the program, capturing relationships between syntactic elements without preserving the exact linear form of the input text.
The primary purpose of an AST is to provide a compact, machine-processable representation of source code that facilitates subsequent phases of compilation, including semantic analysis to check type correctness and meaning, optimization to improve efficiency, and code generation to produce executable output, all independent of the original concrete textual syntax. By structuring the code hierarchically, the AST enables tools to traverse and manipulate the program logic more effectively than working directly with raw strings.
The concept of the abstract syntax tree originated in the early 1960s amid efforts to formally describe and implement programming languages, with John McCarthy introducing the notion of abstract syntax in his work on the semantics of ALGOL 60 to separate meaningful structure from parsing aids like parentheses. Early implementations appeared in compilers for ALGOL 60, such as the syntax-directed translator developed by Edgar T. Irons, which used tree representations to process the language's constructs efficiently.
For instance, consider the arithmetic expression a + b * c, which follows operator precedence rules. In an AST, the root node would represent the addition (+), with a as its left child (a leaf node for the variable), and the right child as a subtree rooted at multiplication (*) with leaves b and c, thereby encoding the evaluation order (a + (b * c)) without redundant nodes for parentheses or spacing.
Key benefits of using an AST include easier traversal for analysissuch as recursive descent to evaluate subexpressionsand simplified transformations during optimization, as the tree form naturally aligns with the nested nature of program semantics, outperforming linear source code strings that require repeated parsing. This structure also supports automated tool integration, like parser generators, enhancing compiler modularity and maintainability.

Comparison to concrete syntax tree

A concrete syntax tree (CST), often referred to as a parse tree, is a hierarchical representation of the source code that faithfully mirrors the full grammatical structure defined by the context-free grammar of the programming language. It includes every token from the input, such as keywords, operators, delimiters like parentheses and braces, and even layout elements if captured by the grammar, ensuring a one-to-one correspondence with the parsed source text.
In contrast, an abstract syntax tree (AST) abstracts away these low-level syntactic details, omitting elements like punctuation, redundant parentheses, and formatting that do not affect the program's semantics. The CST preserves the exact parse structure derived directly from the grammar productions, capturing all intermediate non-terminals and terminals, whereas the AST focuses solely on the essential semantic constructs, such as expressions, statements, and control flow, resulting in a more compact tree with fewer nodes.
To illustrate, consider the source code snippet if (x > 0) { y = 1; }. The corresponding CST would feature explicit nodes for the if keyword, the enclosing parentheses around the condition x > 0 (with separate nodes for the operator > and operands), the opening and closing braces { }, the assignment y = 1 with its operator and semicolon, reflecting the full syntactic hierarchy. The AST, however, simplifies this to a root if node with two subtrees: one for the condition (a binary comparison node with children x and literal 0) and one for the body (an assignment node with y and literal 1), eliminating the punctuation and braces as they are implied by the structure.
These differences lead to distinct trade-offs in utility and efficiency. The CST's comprehensive retention of source details makes it ideal for applications requiring fidelity to the original input, such as generating accurate error messages with line and column positions or performing source-to-source transformations that preserve formatting, like pretty-printing. Conversely, the AST's reduced complexityoften with significantly fewer nodesenhances efficiency for deeper analysis, enabling faster traversal and manipulation in compiler phases without the overhead of irrelevant syntactic noise.
In practice, the CST serves as an intermediate artifact during the parsing phase to ensure syntactic correctness and provide diagnostic feedback, after which it is typically transformed into an AST for subsequent processing in semantic analysis, optimization, and code generation.

Construction

Parsing process

The parsing process transforms linear source code into a hierarchical abstract syntax tree (AST) by analyzing its syntactic structure according to a context-free grammar, which defines the rules for valid program constructs. This conversion enables subsequent compiler phases to operate on a structured representation rather than raw text.
The process begins with lexical analysis, where the source code is tokenized into a sequence of lexical units such as keywords, identifiers, operators, and literals, discarding whitespace and comments. Following tokenization, syntactic analysis parses these tokens to construct an initial concrete syntax tree (CST), which faithfully represents the grammar's production rules, including all syntactic details. The CST is then transformed into an AST by pruning non-essential nodes, such as those for parentheses or punctuation, to create a more abstract, semantically focused hierarchy.
Parsing techniques vary between top-down and bottom-up approaches. Top-down methods, such as recursive descent or LL parsing, start from the grammar's start symbol and recursively expand non-terminals to match the input, building the tree by creating nodes as productions are applied. Bottom-up methods, like LR parsing, begin with the input tokens and reduce them upward through the grammar rules, constructing the tree by combining subtrees during reductions.
Ambiguities in the grammar, such as those arising from operator precedence or associativity, are resolved to ensure unambiguous tree formation. In bottom-up parsers, shift-reduce conflictswhere the parser must decide between shifting the next token or reducing a handleare addressed by precedence rules that favor shifts for higher-precedence operators or specify left/right associativity.
Error handling during parsing involves detecting syntax violations and reporting them with precise source positions, such as line and column numbers, to aid debugging. Common recovery strategies include panic mode, where the parser skips tokens until a synchronizing point, or error productions that insert missing elements to continue building a partial tree.
A simple example of recursive descent parsing for expressions appears in the following pseudocode, which builds an AST node for a binary operation:
function parseExpression() -> ASTNode:
 left = parseTerm()
 while next token is '+' or '-':
 op = consume next token // '+' or '-'
 right = parseTerm()
 left = create (/page/Binary_operation)(left, op, right)
 return left

function parseTerm() -> ASTNode:
 left = parseFactor()
 while next token is '*' or '/':
 op = consume next token // '*' or '/'
 right = parseFactor()
 left = create (/page/Binary_operation)(left, op, right)
 return left

function parseFactor() -> ASTNode:
 if next token is number:
 return create NumberNode(consume next token)
 else if next token is '(':
 consume '('
 expr = parseExpression()
 consume ')'
 return expr
 else:
 report error at current position
 return create ErrorNode()
This implementation handles precedence by nesting calls (multiplication before addition) and constructs the tree bottom-up within each recursive level.

Node types and attributes

Abstract syntax trees are composed of various node types that capture the syntactic structure of source code in a hierarchical manner. Common categories include expression nodes, which represent computations such as binary operations (e.g., addition or multiplication with left and right child operands), unary operations (e.g., negation with a single operand child), literals (e.g., integer or string constants as leaf nodes), and function calls (with a callee child and arguments list). Statement nodes handle control flow and actions, including assignments (with a target and value child), conditionals (with test, body, and optional else subtrees), loops (e.g., while with condition and body children), and returns (with an optional expression child). Declaration nodes define program elements, such as variable declarations (with name and type attributes) and function definitions (with name, parameters list, and body subtree).
Each node in an AST possesses key attributes to facilitate processing and analysis. A primary attribute is the node type identifier, which specifies the syntactic category (e.g., 'BinOp' for binary operations). Nodes include child pointers or lists to reference subtrees, enabling traversal of the hierarchy; for instance, an operator node points to its operands as children. Source location attributes, such as line number and column offset, are commonly attached for debugging and error reporting, mapping nodes back to the original code positions. Optional semantic attributes may be added during analysis, including inferred data types, scope identifiers, or constant values, though these are not part of the core syntactic representation.
The overall structure of an AST forms a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where the root node represents the top-level program unit (e.g., a module or script), internal nodes denote composite constructs, and leaf nodes are terminals like identifiers or constants. This DAG property allows for potential sharing of common subtrees, particularly in optimizations where identical expressions are reused to reduce redundancy. For example, in a function definition node, attributes include the function name (a string), parameters (a list of declaration child nodes), return type (if specified), and body (a sequence of statement child nodes), forming a subtree that encapsulates the function's logic.
Variations in node types arise across programming language paradigms to reflect their syntactic features. Procedural languages emphasize nodes for imperative constructs like sequential statements and mutable assignments, while functional languages incorporate specialized nodes for lambda abstractions (with parameter and body children), higher-order functions, and pattern matching (with matcher and cases subtrees). Object-oriented languages extend this with class declaration nodes containing method and attribute subtrees. These differences ensure the AST aligns with the language's grammar while abstracting away superficial details like parentheses or keywords.

Applications in compilers

Syntax analysis phase

In the compiler pipeline, the syntax analysis phase, commonly referred to as parsing, occurs immediately after lexical analysis and before semantic analysis. This phase processes the sequence of tokens generated by the lexer to verify the syntactic structure of the source code according to the language's grammar. The primary output of syntax analysis is the abstract syntax tree (AST), which encapsulates the essential syntactic hierarchy of the program in a compact, tree-based representation.
The construction of the AST during syntax analysis inherently performs syntax validation by ensuring that the input adheres to the context-free grammar rules of the programming language. If the parser encounters a syntactic violation, such as an unmatched operator or invalid statement sequence, it fails to produce a valid AST and typically reports an error, thereby confirming grammatical correctness. For instance, in languages with structured control flow, the parser builds AST nodes for blocks and statements, allowing detection of issues like unbalanced delimiters through the tree's structure. This validation is platform-independent, as the AST abstracts away low-level details like whitespace or redundant punctuation, focusing solely on the logical syntax.
As an intermediate representation, the AST provides a standardized, tree-structured form that enables the application of language-specific syntax rules that may extend beyond simple context-free parsing, such as ensuring proper nesting in expression hierarchies. It serves as a bridge to subsequent phases by representing the program's syntax in a form amenable to traversal and inspection without the verbosity of the concrete parse tree.
Syntax-directed translation (SDT) is a key technique used in this phase to build and initially annotate the AST, where grammar productions are augmented with semantic actions that synthesize tree nodes and attributes during parsing. In S-attributed grammars, all attributes are synthesized bottom-up, allowing efficient evaluation in a single left-to-right pass compatible with LR parsers, which is ideal for constructing the AST while performing basic syntactic checks. For example, during traversal of an expression like if (condition) { statements }, SDT actions create conditional nodes and verify block balance by linking opening and closing elements in the tree.
Despite its strengths, the AST in the syntax analysis phase is limited to structural validation and does not incorporate semantic verification, such as checking type compatibility in expressions, which requires additional context like symbol tables introduced in later phases. This separation ensures that syntax analysis remains focused on grammatical rules, deferring meaning-based analysis to avoid conflating the two.

Code generation and optimization

In the compiler backend, the abstract syntax tree (AST) serves as a central data structure for performing optimizations and generating target code, enabling transformations that improve efficiency without altering program semantics. Optimizations typically involve traversing the AST to identify and modify substructures, such as replacing complex expressions with simpler equivalents, while code generation maps the optimized tree to machine instructions through recursive evaluation of nodes.
Tree traversals are fundamental to these processes, with pre-order, post-order, and in-order walks allowing systematic analysis and modification of the AST. Pre-order traversal processes a node before its children, useful for top-down optimizations like propagating constants; post-order evaluates children first, enabling bottom-up transformations such as dead code elimination by checking if subtrees produce unused results. For instance, in dead code elimination, a post-order walk identifies and prunes branches where conditional nodes always evaluate to false or loops with zero iterations.
Key optimization techniques leverage the hierarchical structure of the AST. Constant folding evaluates constant subexpressions at compile time, replacing them with their computed values; for example, in the expression a = (b + 1) + 1, a post-order traversal on the addition nodes folds the constants to yield a = b + 2, reducing runtime computations. Common subexpression elimination detects identical subtrees, such as duplicate expressions like x + y appearing multiple times, and replaces subsequent occurrences with references to a single computed temporary, avoiding redundant evaluations. Strength reduction targets operator nodes by replacing expensive operations with cheaper equivalents, like converting multiplication by a constant power of two into a left shift on integer nodes.
Intermediate representations often bridge the AST to final code, with the tree structure facilitating conversions. The AST can be transformed into three-address code (TAC), a linear form where each instruction has at most three operands, by recursively decomposing expression trees into temporaries; for an AST node representing a = b * (c + d), post-order traversal generates TAC like t1 = c + d; t2 = b * t1; a = t2. Similarly, conversion to static single assignment (SSA) form renames variables to expose optimization opportunities, using the AST's scope hierarchy to insert phi functions at join points during a traversal.
Code generation directly interprets the optimized AST by mapping node types to target instructions via pattern matching. Expression trees are translated recursively: leaf nodes (variables or constants) load registers, while binary operator nodes emit instructions like addition or multiplication, often using post-order to ensure operands are ready. Control flow nodes, such as if-statements, generate jumps based on condition subtrees, with the overall tree walk ensuring sequential assembly output.
Adaptations in AST handling vary between just-in-time (JIT) and ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation backends. In AOT, the full AST undergoes comprehensive static optimizations before generating fixed machine code, prioritizing thorough traversals for techniques like CSE to minimize binary size. JIT environments, conversely, may apply lightweight AST passes at runtime, focusing on hot paths with incremental traversals to enable profile-guided optimizations unavailable in AOT.

Other applications

Program analysis tools

Abstract syntax trees (ASTs) are integral to static analysis tools, which traverse the tree structure to identify potential issues in source code without executing it. By pattern matching on specific node types and attributes, these tools detect problems such as null pointer dereferences, where an analysis examines variable assignments and dereference operations to flag paths leading to potential null accesses. Similarly, unused variables are identified by tracking declaration nodes against reference nodes throughout the tree, ensuring comprehensive coverage of variable scopes and lifetimes. This traversal-based approach enables precise, context-sensitive detection that accounts for control flow and data dependencies.
In linting tools and integrated development environment (IDE) features, ASTs facilitate real-time analysis for code quality enforcement. For instance, editors like Visual Studio Code leverage AST parsing through extensions such as ESLint to highlight syntax errors, style violations, and potential bugs as developers type, providing immediate feedback on node-level inconsistencies. ESLint, a widely adopted JavaScript linter, parses code into an AST using parsers like Espree and applies rules that inspect node properties for issues like inconsistent spacing or deprecated patterns.
Security-focused static analysis tools employ AST inspection to uncover vulnerabilities by analyzing code constructs that could lead to exploits. For example, SQL injection risks are detected by traversing query-building nodes to identify unsafe string concatenations or dynamic SQL formations that incorporate unescaped user input. Tools like those based on neural networks over ASTs can enhance detection in related contexts, such as analyzing SQL queries to differentiate benign ones from malicious injections.
ASTs also support the computation of software metrics, such as cyclomatic complexity, which quantifies code maintainability by counting decision points like conditional and loop nodes in the tree. This metric, originally proposed by Thomas J. McCabe, is calculated as the number of edges minus vertices plus two in the control flow graph derived from the AST, helping teams assess risk in complex modules. Tools like SonarQube build custom ASTs during analysis to enforce rules and compute these metrics across languages, walking the tree to aggregate control flow elements.
Compared to source code scanning techniques like regular expressions, AST-based analysis offers key advantages in accuracy and reliability. By operating on a structured representation that preserves semantic context, such as variable scopes and operator precedences, AST traversal minimizes false positives from superficial text matches and enables deeper insights into code intent. This structural awareness is particularly valuable in tools like ESLint and SonarQube, where rule enforcement relies on node relationships rather than linear string patterns.

Source code transformation

Abstract syntax trees (ASTs) enable source code transformation by allowing tools to perform pattern matching on subtrees, identifying specific syntactic structures, and replacing them with new subtrees while preserving the program's semantics. This process typically involves traversing the AST, applying matching rules to locate relevant nodes or subtrees, and then reconstructing the tree with modifications, ensuring type safety and structural integrity are maintained. For instance, transformation frameworks like TAWK use language-independent abstract tree patterns to define matches and associated actions for rewriting code.
In refactoring, ASTs support operations such as renaming variables by systematically updating all declaration and usage nodes across the tree to avoid scope conflicts and maintain references. Extracting methods involves identifying a subtree corresponding to a code block, isolating it into a new method node, and replacing the original with a call node, which reduces duplication and improves modularity. These AST-based refactors ensure correctness by analyzing dependencies like variable scopes and control flow before applying changes.
Transpilation leverages ASTs to convert code between languages or versions, such as Babel's transformation of ES6 to ES5 by rewriting arrow function nodes into equivalent traditional function expressions with proper lexical binding. This involves plugin-based AST visitors that detect arrow function subtrees and replace them with function declarations, polyfills, or other constructs compatible with older environments, enabling backward compatibility without altering behavior.
Formatting tools like Prettier parse source code into an AST and reformat it by adjusting attributes such as indentation and line breaks on nodes, without modifying the underlying structure or semantics. The tool uses AST node locations to preserve comments and blank lines while reprinting the tree in a consistent style, ensuring the output is semantically identical to the input.
AST differencing computes minimal edits between two ASTs by aligning subtrees and identifying insertions, deletions, or updates, which aids version control systems in resolving merge conflicts more accurately than text-based diffs. Algorithms model the problem as tree edit distance minimization, often using solvers to find optimal mappings for code review and change tracking.
For clone detection, ASTs facilitate identifying duplicated code through subtree isomorphism checks, where similar subtrees are compared structurally, or via tree hashing to compute fingerprints of subtrees for efficient similarity detection. Techniques like suffix trees on ASTs scale to large codebases by indexing subtrees and matching them against thresholds for near-miss clones, helping reduce maintenance costs.
A key challenge in AST-based transformations is ensuring round-trip fidelity, where the modified AST serializes back to source code that is equivalent to the original in both syntax and whitespace preservation. Pretty-printing must reconstruct trivia like comments and formatting accurately, but ambiguities in AST representations can lead to loss of information, requiring additional metadata storage during parsing.

References

 Abstract Syntax - cs.Princeton

Syntax - Computer Science

16.4 Abstract Syntax Trees in Practice

 Chapter 6 The Abstract Syntax Tree

 7 - Parser Tree and Abstract Syntax - Compiler Design

 A Review of the Abstract Syntax Tree

https://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/towards/node12.html

A syntax directed compiler for ALGOL 60 - ACM Digital Library

Lecture 2: Abstract and Concrete Syntax

Abstract vs. Concrete Syntax Trees - Eli Bendersky's website

Compilers Lecture #9

 Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools

 AST Construction - Cornell: Computer Science

2. Kaleidoscope: Implementing a Parser and AST - LLVM

ast Abstract syntax trees Python 3.14.0 documentation

 Basics of Compiler Design - Otterbein University

 ThE STRucTuRE OF A COMpiLER - cs.wisc.edu

12 Abstract Syntax and Parsing - CSCI 3155

Abstract Syntax Tree

 Syntax-Directed Definitions - Stony Brook Computer Science

 1 Abstract Syntax Trees AST Data Structure Visitor Interface Accept ...

 Three-Address Code IR

Abstract Syntax Trees and Tree Traversal

Optimization: constant folding | CSCI 1260 - Compilers

CS312 Problem Set 5B: Common Subexpression Elimination

 G: Simulation-based Code Duplication for Enhancing Compiler ...

 Lecture Notes on Common Subexpression Elimination

Compilation in Java: JIT vs AOT - BellSoft

Practical null pointer dereference detection via value-dependence ...

Retrofitting null-safety onto Java at Meta

Glossary - ESLint - Pluggable JavaScript Linter

Selectors - ESLint - Pluggable JavaScript Linter

Long shortterm memory on abstract syntax tree for SQL injection ...

Trident: Detecting SQL Injection Attacks via Abstract Syntax Tree ...

Evaluating the Dependency Between Cyclomatic Complexity and ...

JCL - Sonar Documentation

What is static analysis? - Blog - Secure Code Warrior

JavaScript/TypeScript | SonarQube Server 8.9 - Sonar Documentation

Effective pattern matching of source code using abstract syntax ...

 A Correct Refactoring Operation to Rename Global Variables ... - HAL

 Behind the Intent of Extract Method Refactoring - NSF PAR

Automated variable renaming: are we there yet?

Understanding ASTs by Building Your Own Babel Plugin - SitePoint

API - Prettier

An Optimal Structure-Aware Code Difference Framework with ...

AST Differencing for Solidity Smart Contracts - arXiv

 Scalable and Accurate Tree-based Detection of Code Clones

 Clone Detection Using Abstract Syntax Suffix Trees - SciSpace

High-fidelity C/C++ code transformation | Request PDF
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion