Adagio for Strings Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Adagio for Strings
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Adagio for Strings is a short, elegiac composition for string orchestra by American composer Samuel Barber (19101981), adapted from the second movement ("Molto adagio") of his String Quartet, Op. 11, completed in 1936 while Barber was a Fellow of the American Academy in Rome. The orchestral version was prepared at the request of Arturo Toscanini and premiered on November 5, 1938, by Toscanini conducting the NBC Symphony Orchestra in a radio broadcast from New York. Lasting approximately eight minutes, the work unfolds in a single, arching phrase marked by rising tensions and a gradual crescendo to a poignant climax before subsiding into silence, evoking profound sorrow and catharsis through its modal harmonies and inexorable melodic line. Its cultural resonance intensified during World War II, with performances following announcements of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's death in 1945 and later associations with mourning events, including after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, cementing its status as a staple of American funereal music. Frequently featured in films such as Platoon (1986) and public commemorations, Adagio for Strings endures as one of the most performed and emotionally potent orchestral works of the 20th century, reflecting Barber's neoclassical style rooted in romantic expressivity.

Origins and Composition

Context in Barber's String Quartet

The Adagio for Strings originated as the second movement of Samuel Barber's String Quartet, Op. 11, composed in 1936 during a summer sojourn in Europe, when Barber was 26 years old and transitioning from student to established composer. Having completed formal studies at the Curtis Institute of Music, where he trained in composition under Rosario Scalero from 1924 onward, Barber demonstrated maturation in handling extended lyrical forms, building on earlier vocal and chamber works like Dover Beach (1931). 
The quartet's structure comprises three movements: a sonata-form Molto allegro e appassionato opening with angular, rhythmic drive; the central Molto adagio emphasizing sustained, arching phrases in B minor; and a concluding Molto allegro (ma non tanto) that varies the first movement's material. Within this framework, the Adagio provides stark contrast through its introspective calm, unfolding over approximately eight minutes with gradual dynamic swells and a poignant climax resolving to a serene close, as evident in the autograph manuscript.
Barber's approach in the quartet adhered to tonal harmony and romantic expressivity, diverging from the neoclassical sparseness and atonal innovations pursued by peers like Aaron Copland or the migr modernists influencing American music in the 1930s. This stylistic fidelity to 19th-century models, prioritizing emotional resonance over structural abstraction, positioned the work as a counterpoint to prevailing trends, with the Adagio's modal inflections and voice-leading rooted in verifiable score analysis rather than avant-garde experimentation.

Creative Process and Influences

Samuel Barber composed the String Quartet in B minor, Op. 11the source of the Adagio for Strings as its second movementprimarily in Rome during 1936, where he was residing as a Rome Prize fellow at the American Academy. The work, completed that summer, was dedicated to his uncle Sidney Homer, a composer of art songs, and aunt Louise Homer, reflecting familial musical ties that influenced Barber's early development.
Barber's creative approach drew from late-Romantic traditions, emphasizing lyrical string writing akin to Vaughan Williams's Fantasia on a Theme of Thomas Tallis in its layered, expressive textures for strings. While specific personal grief events in 1936 remain undocumented in primary accounts, Barber's inherent moody disposition shaped the introspective quality of the slow movement, which he identified as particularly potent during composition. He sketched iteratively, focusing on building emotional depth through sustained lines and harmonic tension, as evidenced by provisional manuscripts revised into the final published version by 1943.
The quartet was tailored for the Curtis String Quartet, with whom Barber collaborated, underscoring his intent to craft idiomatic chamber music grounded in technical precision rather than modernist experimentation. This process prioritized causal structural elementssuch as motivic development and voicingfor evoking profound affect, aligning with Barber's conservative stylistic preferences amid contemporary avant-garde trends.

Instrumentation of Original Version

The original version of Adagio for Strings, as the second movement of Samuel Barber's String Quartet, Op. 11, is scored for standard string quartet instrumentation: first violin, second violin, viola, and cello. This setup employs a single player per part, enabling precise dynamic control across a range from pianississimo to fortississimo, with prominent gradual swells that layer intensity through coordinated phrasing.
The opening presents the two violins in unison on a prolonged B (as a breve in 4/2 meter), marked molto adagio espressivo cantando at pp with a crescendo, initiating the B minor tonality. Viola and cello enter staggered, the former with descending fragments fostering dissonant tensions against the violins' line, while the latter sustains pedal tones to underpin the harmonic structure and textural depth.
Relative to the later string orchestra arrangement, the quartet scoring yields heightened transparency, as individual voices interweave without the sonic fusion from sectional doubling, preserving line clarity in polyphonic passages. This distinction is audible in quartet recordings, such as the Dover Quartet's rendition, where motivic exchanges and inner voicings emerge more distinctly than in fuller orchestral textures.

Premiere and Orchestration

Initial Performances

The String Quartet in B minor, Op. 11, which incorporates the Adagio as its second movement, received its world premiere in provisional form on December 14, 1936, performed by the Pro Arte Quartet at the Villa Aurelia, the residence of the American Academy in Rome, where Barber held a fellowship. This performance occurred toward the end of Barber's residency and featured an initial version of the finale, which he later revised; the event drew limited attendance consistent with academic and expatriate musical circles during the economic constraints of the Great Depression.
Barber arranged the Adagio movement for string orchestra in 1936 at the request of Arturo Toscanini, who returned the score without comment but proceeded to program it. The standalone orchestral version debuted on November 5, 1938, in a live NBC radio broadcast from Studio 8H in New York, conducted by Toscanini with the NBC Symphony Orchestra; this broadcast marked the piece's initial public exposure beyond chamber settings and elicited immediate listener correspondence praising its emotional depth, though critical notice remained subdued amid broader programming.

Toscanini Commission and Arrangement

In 1938, conductor Arturo Toscanini, having expressed interest in Samuel Barber's works, received a string orchestra arrangement of the Adagio movement from Barber's String Quartet, Op. 11, alongside the score for Barber's First Essay for Orchestra, Op. 12. Barber prepared this adaptation specifically for Toscanini and the NBC Symphony Orchestra, expanding the original quartet texture into a fuller ensemble while preserving the core melodic line and harmonic progression. The arrangement was completed rapidly, enabling its prompt rehearsal and performance.
The premiere occurred on November 5, 1938, during a radio broadcast from NBC Studio 8H in New York, with Toscanini leading the strings of the NBC Symphony Orchestra. This adaptation scored for string orchestratypically featuring 8 first violins, 8 second violins, 4 violas, 4 cellos, and 4 double bassesprovided increased volume and blended timbres compared to the quartet version, facilitating broader projection of the work's rising chromatic theme and sustained dissonances. The orchestral forces, totaling around 28 players, amplified the piece's inherent emotional trajectory through denser contrapuntal layering and dynamic swells, as captured in the preserved broadcast recording, which disseminated the music to a national audience. The score was published by G. Schirmer, Inc., securing its availability for subsequent performances.

Musical Analysis

Formal Structure

Adagio for Strings employs an arch-like form, structured as ABA' around a single thematic motif introduced in B-flat minor. This symmetrical architecture features an initial presentation, progressive intensification to a central climax, and a mirrored resolution, spanning approximately 68 measures without a conventional development section akin to sonata form. The piece, marked Molto adagio in 4/2 time, typically endures 7 to 8 minutes at a tempo where the half note approximates 60 beats per minute, emphasizing sustained metric regularity.
The exposition in measures 120 establishes the core theme through long-held notes and gradual dynamic swells, setting a foundation of repose. Rising sequential patterns from measures 21 onward escalate textural density and pitch range, peaking in dissonance and fortissimo intensity near measure 40. A brief silence follows the climax, succeeded by a decrescendo that recapitulates transformed elements of the opening theme at reduced octave and volume, achieving structural closure by measure 68. This progression relies on incremental variations in duration, register, and layering rather than motivic fragmentation or thematic contrast.

Harmonic and Melodic Elements

The Adagio for Strings opens in B-flat minor with a prolonged B-flat pedal tone held as a double whole note in the upper strings at pianissimo, establishing a static foundation before introducing melodic motion. The primary melody unfolds through predominantly stepwise ascent from this B-flat, incorporating chromatic inflections such as raised scale degrees to heighten tension, followed by a mirrored descent that reinforces the piece's arch-like symmetry. Appoggiaturas and melodic suspensions further delineate the line, creating transient dissonances that resolve into consonance via smooth voice leading, a technique rooted in common-practice tonal conventions.
Harmonically, the work adheres to functional tonality, employing root-position triads and seventh chords within B-flat minor, augmented by modal mixtures that introduce flattened submediant and Phrygian cadential inflections for color without abandoning diatonic resolution. Pedal points, often on the tonic or dominant, underpin extended phrases, while suspensions in the inner voices delay harmonic closure through half and deceptive cadences, building cumulative dissonance. The climactic fortissimo chord, occurring approximately six minutes in, functions as an intensified dominant preparation, resolving into a final plagal cadence that prioritizes structural inevitability over chromatic extremity.
These elementsstepwise melodic contours, suspension-driven voice leading, and modulated tonal progressionscausally generate perceptual tension through acoustic interference patterns that resolve into harmonic consonance, a mechanism observable in Schenkerian reductions where the Urlinie descends from the initial ^3 to ^1, mirroring the melody's arch while ensuring motivic unity across voices.

Emotional Impact from First Principles

The emotional power of Adagio for Strings derives causally from its manipulation of auditory tension and release, achieved through harmonic suspensions, chromatic inflections, and gradual dynamic expansions that delay resolution, thereby engaging listeners' expectancy mechanisms in a manner analogous to unresolved emotional states. Barber initiates with a sustained B-flat pedal in the violins, overlaid by a hesitant ascending melody featuring appoggiaturas that prolong dissonance over consonant anchors, creating friction resolved only after extended suspension; this structural deferral, compounded by staggered entrances among string sections, builds inexorable momentum toward climactic swells, where full orchestral density amplifies physiological arousal via increased auditory intensity. Such mechanics transcend subjective interpretation, as evidenced by psychophysiological studies showing slowed heart rates, elevated skin conductance, and reports of chills or lacrimation in response to similar tonal progressions, indicating autonomic nervous system activation tied directly to harmonic expectancy fulfillment rather than vague intrinsics like "sadness."
!(.\relative c'' { \set Staff.midiInstrument = #"string ensemble 1" \clef treble \key bes \minor \time 4/2 \tempo "Molto adagio" bes\breve(~\pp\< | bes4\! a bes c a bes c bes | c\< des bes c des c des ees | \time 5/2 c1.\! }](./assets/55f30ab32f5ac76201bc0574e1e2cce2.png)
Empirical investigations confirm tonality's efficacy in eliciting these responses, with tonal stimuli consistently producing stronger emotional valence and arousal than atonal equivalents, as tonal frameworks facilitate predictable yet delayed resolutions that align with innate perceptual hierarchies, fostering resonance across diverse listeners. In contrast, 20th-century serialist doctrines, often advanced within academically biased environments favoring abstraction over accessibility, dismissed such tonal directness as sentimental, prioritizing esoteric complexity; however, listener data reveal atonal music's relative inefficacy in inducing comparable physiological engagement, underscoring tonality's empirical advantage in causal emotional induction without reliance on cultural preconditioning.
Cross-cultural performance metrics and perceptual studies further validate this universality, with tonal works like the Adagio evoking consistent reports of profound affect in non-Western audiences, attributable to shared brainstem reflexes to consonance-dissonance patterns rather than ideologically imposed narratives. This broad appeal persists despite institutional preferences in musicology for modernist paradigms, which empirical metrics show underperform in affective reach, highlighting how structural causality in tonality overrides theoretical elitism.

Reception and Criticisms

Early Critical Responses

The premiere of Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings on November 5, 1938, by the NBC Symphony Orchestra under Arturo Toscanini elicited positive critical notice in The New York Times, which described the work as honest and unpretentious music marked by a clear purpose, sustained melodic arch, and simple yet significant climaxes built from basic chords. The review attributed these qualities to the 28-year-old composer's true talent, rapidly increasing skill, and capacity for self-criticism, deeming the Adagio the stronger of two pieces by Barber featured on the program.
In the ensuing years through the early 1940s, the piece's visibility expanded via radio broadcasts, coinciding with escalating World War II tensions following its 1938 debut. Toscanini's 1942 recording with the NBC Symphony further disseminated it over the airwaves. By 1945, it had achieved rapid adoption in memorial settings, including its performance at President Franklin D. Roosevelt's funeral procession on April 14, signaling early recognition of its elegiac resonance amid national mourning. While some early accounts noted its emotional directness without anticipating its later symbolic weight, the initial reception emphasized structural clarity over profound pathos.

Modernist Dismissals and Tonal Defense

In the mid-20th century, modernist critics, influenced by the rise of serialism and avant-garde experimentation, often dismissed Samuel Barber's adherence to tonality as retrograde and insufficiently innovative. Composer and critic Virgil Thomson, a prominent figure in American musical circles, characterized Barber's output as appealing to "high middlebrow taste," implying a superficial emotionalism lacking intellectual rigor. Similarly, Thomson described Barber's music in his 1971 book American Music Since 1910 as "romantic, predominantly emotional, embodying no ideas but rather feelings," critiquing its reliance on expressive lyricism over structural novelty amid the era's push toward atonal and twelve-tone techniques. These views reflected a broader institutional bias in academia and criticism, where avant-garde progressivismoften aligned with post-war European influences like Schoenbergprioritized dissonance and abstraction, marginalizing tonal composers like Barber as conservative relics despite their empirical resonance with audiences.
Such dismissals overlooked the causal mechanisms of tonal music's effectiveness in conveying universal emotional states through resolved harmonic progressions and melodic contours rooted in human perceptual biology, which foster shared catharsis rather than intellectual estrangement. Barber's Adagio for Strings, with its stepwise ascents, pedal points, and climactic suspensions in B-flat minor, elicits measurable physiological responsessuch as increased heart rate variability and tear productionin listeners, as documented in studies of music-induced emotion, contrasting with the frequent audience disengagement from atonal works that prioritize novelty over consonance. Performance data underscores this: the Adagio remains a repertoire staple, with thousands of annual orchestrations worldwide and recognition as one of the 20th century's most performed pieces, while many serialist compositions languish in obscurity outside academic settings due to limited public draw.
Defenders of Barber's approach argue that modernist elevation of atonality stemmed less from aesthetic superiority than from a politicized ideology equating accessibility with commercialism, a bias evident in the mid-century dominance of serialism in university programs despite its scant commercial or attendance success compared to tonal counterparts. Empirical metrics, including box-office records from major orchestras, reveal tonal works like the Adagio sustaining broader engagementevidenced by repeated programming and crossover appealover avant-garde experiments, affirming tonality's realism in mirroring innate emotional structures rather than imposing contrived obscurity. This defense privileges observable outcomes: sustained listener retention and affective impact, untainted by the era's theoretical dogmas that conflated innovation with rejection of tradition.

Claims of Overuse and Counterarguments

Critics have argued that the Adagio for Strings has been overused in film and media since its prominent feature in Platoon (1986), leading to perceptions of it as a clich for conveying profound sorrow. This sentiment intensified after its frequent deployment in 9/11 memorials and tributes, where it became a shorthand for national mourning, contributing to "trope fatigue" among listeners exposed to repetitive emotional cues. Publications have labeled it a "movie clich of all times" due to such applications, with overuse diminishing its novelty for some audiences.
Counterarguments emphasize empirical evidence of sustained popularity rather than decline. Streaming data shows the piece garnering over 39 million plays on Spotify for key recordings, indicating broad, ongoing appeal undiminished by alleged saturation. Recent performances and recordings persist into the 2020s, including HAUSER's 2020 rendition and inclusions in major orchestra catalogs like the Israel Philharmonic's early-decade releases, contradicting narratives of artistic exhaustion. No verifiable metrics demonstrate reduced attendance or sales for live renditions tied to overuse claims, suggesting persistence stems from the work's inherent structural depthits slow harmonic ascent and unresolved tensionswhich evoke universal response irrespective of context. Critics' fatigue often reflects elite familiarity bias rather than public disinterest, as global listenership data affirms enduring resonance.

Cultural Legacy and Usage

Memorial and Patriotic Contexts

"Adagio for Strings" was broadcast on radio immediately following the announcement of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's death on April 14, 1945, marking one of its earliest associations with national mourning. The piece's performance during this period helped establish it as a vehicle for collective grief in the United States, selected for its capacity to evoke solemn reflection amid wartime and postwar transitions.
Following the assassination of President John F. Kennedy on November 22, 1963, the National Symphony Orchestra performed "Adagio for Strings" in a nationwide radio broadcast shortly after the funeral proceedings. Jacqueline Kennedy, who knew it as one of her husband's favored compositions, facilitated its inclusion to honor his memory through music resonant with American audiences. This usage reinforced the work's role in processing profound national loss, drawing on its established precedent from the Roosevelt era.
In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, "Adagio for Strings" featured prominently in memorial concerts and broadcasts, including a performance conducted by Leonard Slotkin at Carnegie Hall on September 12, 2001. Its selection for such events underscores a pattern of deployment during crises, contributing to public rituals of remembrance and resilience without reliance on contemporary political framing. Documented broadcasts and performances indicate its efficacy in facilitating shared emotional response, as evidenced by repeated institutional choices across decades of American history.

Appearances in Media and Popular Culture

The Adagio for Strings gained prominence in cinema through its inclusion in David Lynch's The Elephant Man (1980), where it accompanies scenes depicting the protagonist's isolation and dignity amid deformity, enhancing the film's exploration of humanity without original composition alterations. This early usage marked an initial crossover from concert halls to narrative soundtracks, exposing the work to broader audiences via theatrical release and subsequent home video.
Its association with war intensified in Oliver Stone's Platoon (1986), soundtracking helicopter assaults and battlefield aftermaths to evoke collective grief, a deployment that propelled recordings like Leonard Bernstein's 1966 version onto bestseller lists and radio playlists post-premiere. The film's box office success, grossing over $138 million worldwide on a $6 million budget, correlated with heightened classical sales, though critics later noted such integrations risked rendering the piece a shorthand for pathos rather than independent artistry.
Television appearances often employed parody to underscore overuse, as in The Simpsons episode "The Strong Arms of the Ma" (season 14, episode 9, aired February 2, 2003), where it swells during Marge's bar rampage in ironic nod to Platoon's intensity, and "Little Orphan Millie" (season 19, episode 6, aired November 11, 2007), amplifying mock-gloom en route to the Simpsons' home. These instances, while humorous, illustrate the work's permeation into pop satire, fostering familiarity among younger viewers yet prompting debates on trivialization of its structural restraint and harmonic tension.
Electronic adaptations emerged in the late 1990s, with William Orbit's ambient reworking on Pieces in a Modern Style (1999) layering synths over Barber's strings to reach electronic listeners, peaking at number one on the UK Classical Chart and introducing the piece to non-traditional markets. Tisto's trance remix, released in 2005, further charted in dance genres, amassing millions of plays, but elicited purist critiques for superimposing euphoric builds that obscured the original's inexorable crescendo and modal ambiguity, prioritizing rhythmic drive over emotional inevitability. Such versions expanded accessibilityevidenced by Orbit's album sales exceeding 500,000 unitsyet fueled arguments that commercial remixing commodifies classical depth, detaching it from Barber's intent of pure string orchestration.

Notable Recent Performances and Recordings

In January 2025, the Berliner Philharmoniker, under conductor Kirill Petrenko, performed Adagio for Strings at the Philharmonie Berlin on January 18, delivering a rendition noted for its intimate emotional depth within a program featuring Rachmaninoff and Gubaidulina. The performance was recorded and streamed via the orchestra's Digital Concert Hall, preserving the work's slow-building harmonic tension in a modern orchestral context.
The United States Marine Band, known as "The President's Own," presented a tribute performance of the piece on December 30, 2024, emphasizing its solemn resonance in a military ensemble setting. This rendition highlighted the work's adaptability to wind and string forces, maintaining Barber's original dynamic swells and sustained phrases without alteration.
Cellist HAUSER released an orchestral adaptation in February 2020, featuring the London Symphony Orchestra conducted by Robert Ziegler, which reimagined the score for solo cello and strings on his album Classic. The arrangement preserved the piece's core melodic arc while foregrounding the cello's timbre, garnering views in the millions via video release.
The New York City Ballet incorporated Adagio for Strings into its 2024 Fall Season program Solo by Paul Taylor, with performances on October 3, 12, and 13, underscoring its enduring role in choreographic interpretations. These instances reflect the composition's sustained programming in elite ensembles and venues, with no evident reduction in frequency amid streaming alternatives, as evidenced by ongoing inclusions in symphony and ballet repertoires.

References

Adagio for Strings, Samuel Barber - LA Phil

THE STORY BEHIND: Barber's "Adagio for Strings"

Catalogue Classics: Samuel Barber Adagio for Strings

BARBER: Adagio for Strings - Utah Symphony

The Impact of Barber's 'Adagio for Strings' - NPR

Adagio for Strings - 5 Fascinating Facts - Fort Collins Symphony

 BarberString Quartet - Music@Menlo

Samuel Barber Composer - The Kennedy Center

Biography - Samuel Barber - Deutsche Grammophon

String Quartet in B minor, Op. 11 (1935)

String Quartet, Op. 11 - Samuel Barber - earsense

Barber, Adagio for Strings Program Notes - Fort Collins Symphony

The Story of Samuel Barber's "Adagio for Strings" - Thomas Larson

 Stuttgart Chamber Orchestra

 A Graduate Recital in Voice

Samuel Barber - Wise Music Classical

Legacy of String Quartet - Curtis Institute of Music

Barber String Quartet program notes - Community MusicWorks

Adagio from String Quartet No. 1, Op. 11, SAMUEL BARBER (1910 ...

 Barber String Quartet Op 11 Adagio For Strings

The Strange Genius of the Adagio for Strings - WRTI

Barber: Adagio for Strings - YouTube

Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings - am I the only one who feels this?

https://www.musicroom.com/samuel-barber-string-quartet-op-11-string-quartet-hl50338950

How did Barber's Adagio for Strings evolve into his Agnus Dei?

Samuel Barber: Adagio for Strings - Argyle Arts

Samuel Barber Adagio for Strings - Berliner Philharmoniker

 Adagio for Strings--Arturo Toscanini, conductor - Library of Congress

Samuel Barber - Adagio for Strings - Boston Symphony Orchestra

Adagio for Strings, Op. 11 (Original Edition) Orchestra - Hal Leonard

Types Of Musical Forms (Examples, Definitions, Lists) - Joshua Ross

https://musescore.com/user/11242421/scores/7795652

ESSEX SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA

Compositional Techniques Used in Samuel Barber's 'Adagio for ...

An exploratory study of musical emotions and psychophysiology.

Intensely pleasurable responses to music correlate with activity in ...

Listeners' perceptual and emotional responses to tonal and atonal ...

Music is What Feelings Sound Like: The Role of Tonal and Atonal ...

Atonal Music: Can Uncertainty Lead to Pleasure? - PMC

Cross-Cultural Biases of Emotion Perception in Music - PMC - NIH

 Emotional responses to music - Isabelle Peretz Research Laboratory

Two by Barber, American Composer, 'Adagio for Strings' and 'Essay ...

Barber's 'Adagio' Is Not The Saddest Music In The World - NPR

Barber Adagio for Strings (rec1942) - YouTube

Barber's Adagio for Strings - NPR

A coda for Samuel Barber - Los Angeles Times

The popular reception of Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings. - Gale

Samuel Barber At 100, Reconsidered - NPR

Music - The New York Times

Samuel Barber: a forgotten neo-Romantic great | Classical music

Samuel Barber: a sideways-looking genius - Gramophone

The Impact of Barber's 'Adagio for Strings' - NEPM

When classical music masterpieces become soundtrack cliches

Adagio for Strings (x5) - Filmscalpel

cliche | Richard Nilsen

Adagio for Strings, Op. 11a - song and lyrics by Samuel ... - Spotify

HAUSER - Adagio for Strings (Barber) - YouTube

Israel Philharmonic Orchestra | Spotify

What's the New Hallelujah? Here Are Five Totally Overused Songs ...

Celebrating Samuel Barber and his Adagio for Strings | OUPblog

Barber's <em>Adagio</em>: The Saddest Piece Ever? - WQXR

Music & JFK's Legacy - Thomas Larson

see description | National September 11 Memorial & Museum

Titles featuring Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings as soundtrack

The Elephant Man OST - 10 - Adagio for Strings - YouTube

Samuel Barber: Adagio for Strings (Platoon) - Classic FM

"The Simpsons" Marge Gamer (TV Episode 2007) - Soundtracks

Little Orphan Millie/References - Wikisimpsons, the Simpsons Wiki

Barber: Adagio for Strings / Petrenko Berliner Philharmoniker

Kirill Petrenko with Rachmaninoff's Francesca da Rimini

Kirill Petrenko conducts Barber's Adagio for Strings, Gubaidulina's ...

"The President's Own" United States Marine Band - Facebook

United States Marine Band - YouTube

Adagio for Strings - YouTube

HAUSER DEBUTS NEW MUSIC VIDEO FOR ADAGIO FOR ...

Adagio for Strings (Barber) - by HAUSER - Apple Music

New York City Ballet Presents 2024 Fall Season - City Life Org
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion