Administrative share Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Administrative share
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 An administrative share is a special type of hidden network share in Microsoft Windows operating systems, reserved for interprocess communication or remote administration of the server. These shares are automatically created by default on Windows systems to facilitate remote management of computer environments or networks. Identified by the STYPE_SPECIAL share type (value 0x80000000), they can be combined with other share types like disk tree shares and are typically denoted by a dollar sign ($) suffix in their names, making them invisible in standard file explorers.
The most common administrative shares include drive-specific shares such as C,D**, **D,D, and E,whichmaptotherootdirectoriesoftherespectivediskdrives,providingfullaccesstotheentirevolumeforadministrativetasks.(https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/troubleshoot/windowsserver/networking/problemsadministrativesharesmissing)ADMIN**, which map to the root directories of the respective disk drives, providing full access to the entire volume for administrative tasks.(https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/windows-server/networking/problems-administrative-shares-missing) **ADMIN,whichmaptotherootdirectoriesoftherespectivediskdrives,providingfullaccesstotheentirevolumeforadministrativetasks.(https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/troubleshoot/windowsserver/networking/problemsadministrativesharesmissing)ADMIN points to the %SystemRoot% directory (typically C:\Windows), enabling remote access to system files and configuration for maintenance or troubleshooting. IPCisdedicatedto(/page/Interprocesscommunication)vianamedpipes,supportingprotocolsfortaskslikeremoteprocedurecallsandistheonlyadministrativesharethatcannotbedeleted.(https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/troubleshoot/windowsserver/networking/problemsadministrativesharesmissing)AdditionalshareslikePRINT** is dedicated to (/page/Inter-process_communication) via named pipes, supporting protocols for tasks like remote procedure calls and is the only administrative share that cannot be deleted.(https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/windows-server/networking/problems-administrative-shares-missing) Additional shares like **PRINTisdedicatedto(/page/Interprocesscommunication)vianamedpipes,supportingprotocolsfortaskslikeremoteprocedurecallsandistheonlyadministrativesharethatcannotbedeleted.(https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/troubleshoot/windowsserver/networking/problemsadministrativesharesmissing)AdditionalshareslikePRINT and FAX$ handle remote printer and fax administration, while NETLOGON and SYSVOL appear on domain controllers for Active Directory replication, though they are not hidden. Access to these shares is restricted to members of the local Administrators group, ensuring they serve secure, elevated functions without exposing resources to standard users.
Administrative shares are created during system startup unless explicitly disabled through registry modifications, such as setting the AutoShareServer or AutoShareWks values to 0 under HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\System\CurrentControlSet\Services\LanmanServer\Parameters. Disabling them can resolve certain security concerns but may cause issues with remote administration tools, domain logons, or diagnostics like MMC snap-ins and Netdom.exe, leading to errors such as "System error 53" or LDAP bind failures. Microsoft recommends retaining these shares for proper network management, as their absence often indicates registry changes, malware, or misconfigurations that require verification and potential restoration by restarting the Server service after registry adjustments.

Overview

Definition and Purpose

Administrative shares are hidden network shares automatically created by Windows on both servers and workstations, providing administrative access to drives, folders, and system resources such as the root of each drive (e.g., C)ortheWindowsinstallationdirectory(e.g.,ADMIN) or the Windows installation directory (e.g., ADMIN)ortheWindowsinstallationdirectory(e.g.,ADMIN). These shares are designated as special resources within the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol, marked with a dollar sign ($) suffix to conceal them from standard network browsing, and are accessible only to members of the local Administrators group. By default, they exist on all Windows systems to support seamless remote connectivity without the need for explicit configuration.
The primary purpose of administrative shares is to facilitate remote management tasks, including file transfer, system monitoring, and troubleshooting, by allowing elevated users to access resources over the network without manually creating shares. They enable administrators to perform operations like connecting to named pipes for interprocess communication (via IPC)ormanaginghardwareresources(viaPRINT) or managing hardware resources (via PRINT)ormanaginghardwareresources(viaPRINT), streamlining administrative workflows in networked environments. A key benefit is the simplification of IT administration in domain environments, where these default access points allow tools and servicessuch as Microsoft Endpoint Configuration Managerto connect remotely for tasks like software distribution and system maintenance.
Common use cases include remotely backing up files by accessing drive roots, deploying software through management tools that leverage these shares for installation on target machines, and inspecting system files across a network to diagnose issues or apply updates. For instance, administrators can use C$ to copy configuration files or logs from a remote workstation, supporting efficient troubleshooting without physical access.

Historical Development

Administrative shares were introduced with Windows NT 3.1 in 1993 as hidden network shares within the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol implementation, enabling remote administrative access for enterprise networking and management tasks. These shares, such as C$ and ADMIN$, were automatically created by default in the Windows NT family of operating systems to facilitate file and resource sharing over local networks, building on earlier SMB foundations developed by IBM in the mid-1980s and adopted by Microsoft in LAN Manager for OS/2 in 1987. Initially relying on NetBIOS over TCP/IP for transport, the feature marked a shift toward native SMB support in Windows NT, distinct from the 9x consumer lines.
The functionality persisted as a default feature through subsequent releases, including Windows 2000, XP, and Server 2003, where it integrated seamlessly with the introduction of Active Directory in Windows 2000 for domain-based administration and remote management of networked systems. In Windows 2000, administrative shares supported delegated permissions within Active Directory organizational units, enhancing enterprise scalability without altering core share mechanics. By the mid-2000s, with Windows Vista and Windows 7 (released in 2007 and 2009, respectively), security enhancements via User Account Control (UAC) introduced partial restrictions: local administrator accounts were filtered when accessing shares remotely over the network by default, requiring registry modifications like setting LocalAccountTokenFilterPolicy to 1 for full access. This change aimed to mitigate elevation risks while preserving share availability for domain-joined systems and Server editions like 2008.
Administrative shares remained unchanged in core functionality across Windows 8, 10, and 11, as well as Server 2012, 2016, 2019, 2022, and 2025, as of November 2025, continuing to support remote administration despite protocol evolutions. Windows Server 2025, released in February 2025, maintains administrative shares as a default feature with no deprecations or alterations. Key milestones included no deprecations amid SMB version updates, such as SMB 2.0 in Windows Vista (2006) for improved performance and SMB 3.0 in Windows 8 and Server 2012 (2012) for enhanced encryption and resiliency, with administrative shares fully compatible across these iterations. The feature's roots in LAN Manager's NetBIOS-based SMB transitioned fully to direct TCP/IP in Windows NT, solidifying its role in modern Windows networking without fundamental alterations.

Technical Implementation

Share Naming Conventions

Administrative shares in Windows follow a standardized naming convention that appends a dollar sign ($) to the share name, rendering them hidden from standard network browsing interfaces such as Network Explorer or My Network Places.
The default administrative shares for disk volumes are named using the drive letter followed by the $ suffix; for instance, the root of the C: drive is shared as C,andtheD:driveasD, and the D: drive as D,andtheD:driveasD. This pattern applies to all local fixed drives that are shared, ensuring consistency for remote access to volume roots.
The ADMIN$ share specifically points to the %SystemRoot% directory, typically C:\Windows, facilitating remote administration of system files and resources. Additionally, the IPC$ share is designated for inter-process communication, enabling named pipe connections essential for remote procedure calls between systems.
Variants such as Print$ (for the %SystemRoot%\System32\Spool\Drivers directory used in printer administration) are also automatically created as administrative shares. These naming conventions have remained uniform since Windows NT, with no modifications in subsequent versions including Windows 11, Windows Server 2022, and Windows Server 2025. The share names and their hidden attribute apply equally to local and remote contexts, though resolution in domain environments relies on DNS or NetBIOS, while workgroups use broadcast-based name resolution, without altering the core naming syntax.

Core Characteristics

Administrative shares in Windows operating systems rely on the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol, also known as Common Internet File System (CIFS) in its earlier implementations, to facilitate file and printer sharing over a network. They are identified by the STYPE_SPECIAL share type (value 0x80000000) in the SMB protocol, which can be combined with other share types like disk tree shares. This protocol enables remote access via Universal Naming Convention (UNC) paths, such as \\server\C$, allowing administrators to connect directly to the root of a drive or system directory from another machine.
Once authenticated as a member of the local Administrators group, users gain full read and write permissions to the entire underlying volume or directory exposed by the administrative share, such as the complete contents of the C: drive via C$. Unlike user-created shares, administrative shares do not support custom permission configurations at the share level; access is governed solely by the system's built-in restrictions and the underlying file system permissions, like NTFS.
These shares are automatically created during system startup if the relevant registry settingsAutoShareServer for servers and AutoShareWks for workstationsare enabled (default value of 1), and they are tied to the mounting of volumes. Upon reboot, the shares are recreated automatically, ensuring persistent availability for administrative tasks without manual intervention, provided the enabling parameters remain intact.
Administrative shares are a feature exclusive to Windows client and server editions, where the LanmanServer service handles their provision over SMB. They are not natively available in Linux or Unix systems but can be accessed by third-party SMB clients, such as Samba implementations, which provide compatibility for cross-platform remote administration.
In terms of performance, administrative shares offer direct mapping to local file system paths, such as C$ pointing straight to the C:\ root, which avoids the overhead of intermediate folder structures or user-defined share configurations, thereby enhancing efficiency for remote administrative operations like backups or software deployment.

Configuration and Access

Enabling and Disabling

Administrative shares are enabled by default on Windows servers and workstations (including Home editions), where they are automatically created during system startup to facilitate remote administration. This default behavior is controlled by the absence or value of specific registry entries that default to enabling the shares. However, remote access using local administrator accounts is restricted by User Account Control (UAC) on all editions since Windows Vista; this can be mitigated by setting the LocalAccountTokenFilterPolicy DWORD value to 1 under HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\(/page/Microsoft)\Windows\CurrentVersion\Policies\(/page/System). Domain-joined systems allow access with domain administrator credentials without this tweak.
To enable or disable administrative shares via registry configuration, administrators must modify the key located at HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\LanmanServer\Parameters. For servers, create or set the DWORD value AutoShareServer to 1 (enabled) or 0 (disabled); for workstations, use AutoShareWks with the same values. Changes take effect after restarting the computer or the Server service using commands such as net stop server followed by net start server. Prior to editing, it is recommended to back up the registry to prevent system instability.
Group Policy provides a centralized method to enforce administrative share settings across environments, available in Windows Server 2008 and later. The relevant setting is found under Computer Configuration > Administrative Templates > Network > Lanman Server > Enable administrative shares, which corresponds to the registry values described above and allows enabling (value 1) or disabling (value 0). This policy is part of the Microsoft Security Guide administrative templates and is recommended to be enabled except in highly secure environments.
Command-line tools offer quick ways to configure and verify administrative shares without graphical interfaces. For registry modifications, PowerShell can be used with Set-ItemProperty -Path "HKLM:\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\LanmanServer\Parameters" -Name "AutoShareWks" -Value 1 (or 0 to disable), followed by a service restart via Restart-Service LanmanServer. The sc.exe utility can manage the Server service similarly. To verify the configuration, run net share in Command Prompt, which lists active shares including C,ADMIN, ADMIN,ADMIN, and IPC$ if enabled.
In Windows Server editions, full control over administrative shares is available through built-in tools like the Group Policy Editor. Client operating systems, such as Windows 11 Pro, provide the local Group Policy Editor by default for these settings, while Home editions lack it and require third-party or manual enablement methods, limiting direct policy management without additional software like RSAT on Pro editions for advanced domain scenarios.

Remote Access Methods

Administrative shares are accessed remotely using Universal Naming Convention (UNC) paths, which follow the syntax \\hostname\sharename or \\IP_address\sharename, where sharename typically ends in a dollar sign ()todenotehiddenadministrativesharessuchasC) to denote hidden administrative shares such as `C)todenotehiddenadministrativesharessuchasCfor the root of the C: drive orADMIN$for the Windows installation directory.(https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/answers/questions/1315593/how-can-i-access-a-shared-directory-on-a-lan-or-a)(https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/answers/questions/257438/windows-10-file-share-access-to-server-2012-2019-f)(https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/windows-server/networking/problems-administrative-shares-missing) Access to these paths requires administrative credentials, such as those from a domain account likeDOMAIN\Administrator` or a local administrator account on the target machine.
Several tools and interfaces facilitate interaction with administrative shares over the network. In Windows Explorer, users can navigate directly to a UNC path by entering it in the address bar, which prompts for credentials if necessary and allows browsing or file operations as if accessing a local drive. From the Command Prompt, the net use command maps a drive letter to an administrative share, for example, net use Z: \\server\C$ followed by entering credentials upon prompt, enabling subsequent access via the assigned drive. In PowerShell, the New-PSDrive cmdlet creates a temporary PSDrive mapped to a UNC path, such as New-PSDrive -Name "Temp" -PSProvider FileSystem -Root "\\server\C$" -Credential (Get-Credential), which supports credential specification and integrates with PowerShell scripting for automated tasks.
Authentication for remote access to administrative shares relies on Windows security protocols, primarily Kerberos in Active Directory domain environments for secure ticket-based verification, with fallback to NTLM for non-domain or legacy scenarios. To ensure elevated privileges, sessions must be initiated with administrative elevation, such as running tools via "Run as Administrator" or providing explicit admin credentials during connection.
Administrative shares maintain cross-version compatibility across Windows operating systems through the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol, supporting versions from SMB 1.0 (though deprecated for security reasons) up to SMB 3.1, allowing connections between modern clients like Windows 11 and older servers like Windows Server 2008 as long as compatible SMB dialects are negotiated.
Common troubleshooting for remote access issues includes addressing "access denied" errors, often caused by User Account Control (UAC) restrictions on remote administrative access in Windows Vista and later, which can be mitigated by disabling UAC filtering for administrators or using elevated credentials. Additionally, ensure TCP port 445 is open on firewalls for SMB traffic, as blocking this port prevents connections; verify by enabling the "File and Printer Sharing (SMB-In)" rule in Windows Defender Firewall.

Security and Limitations

Built-in Restrictions

Access to administrative shares is strictly restricted to members of the local Administrators group on the target computer, or equivalent groups such as Domain Admins in domain environments. Standard users, even those with other elevated privileges, cannot access these shares, and there is no built-in mechanism for delegating such access without adding the user to the Administrators group.
Administrative shares rely on the file system's permissions for enforcement. On NTFS volumes, they utilize advanced permissions and security descriptors. FAT32 and exFAT volumes support administrative shares but lack these advanced features, using only share-level permissions. The IPC$ share, in particular, is limited to facilitating named pipe connections for inter-process communication and does not permit direct file or directory access.
In certain configurations, such as on domain controllers, the ADMIN$ share may be disabled to enhance security, preventing remote access to the Windows installation directory. Additionally, in workgroup environments, administrative shares are unavailable unless the connecting user provides valid local administrator credentials on the target machine.
Starting with Windows Vista and continuing in subsequent versions, User Account Control (UAC) imposes restrictions on remote access to administrative shares, blocking connections from local administrator accounts unless the remote session is explicitly run with elevated privileges.
In modern Windows implementations, including Windows 10 and later, SMB signing is required by default for connections to administrative shares to ensure data integrity and authenticity. For SMB 3.0 and higher protocols, introduced in Windows Server 2012 and Windows 8, encryption is mandated in certain configurations to protect sensitive administrative operations over the network.

Associated Risks and Mitigation

Administrative shares present significant security risks, particularly in enabling lateral movement during cyberattacks. Attackers frequently exploit these shares via the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol to propagate malware or escalate privileges, as seen in techniques like Pass-the-Hash attacks where stolen NTLM hashes allow unauthorized access to remote systems without passwords. Null session vulnerabilities, inherent to SMBv1, further compound this by permitting anonymous enumeration of shares and system information through IPC$ connections, facilitating reconnaissance if administrative shares are exposed. Without proper firewalling, such enumeration can reveal share existence and details, aiding further exploitation.
As of 2025, these risks persist in legacy environments where older Windows systems or unpatched configurations remain common, often due to compatibility needs in hybrid setups. Ransomware campaigns, such as the 2017 WannaCry outbreak, leveraged the EternalBlue vulnerability (CVE-2017-0144) over port 445 to infect systems via SMB, including administrative shares, demonstrating how unmitigated exposures enable widespread propagation. Additionally, unintended data exposure through misconfigured shares can result in compliance violations under regulations like GDPR and CCPA, as sensitive personal information accessible remotely may breach data protection requirements if improperly handled. Microsoft's ongoing security advisories emphasize patching such SMB flaws, with no plans for full deprecation of administrative shares in Windows Server 2025, underscoring their continued utility alongside heightened scrutiny.
In Windows Server 2025, several enhancements to SMB security further mitigate risks associated with administrative shares. SMB signing is now required by default for all outbound connections, ensuring integrity. Encryption is enforced for all outbound SMB 3.x client connections. An SMB authentication rate limiter is enabled by default to prevent brute-force attacks, and auditing for SMB signing and encryption support has been added to monitor compliance.
To mitigate these risks, organizations should disable unnecessary administrative shares using registry modifications, such as setting HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\LanmanServer\Parameters\AutoShareServer to 0 (DWORD) on servers, or via Group Policy Objects to enforce this across domains, followed by a restart of the Server service. Enforcing SMB 3.1.1 with built-in encryption protects data in transit; this can be configured via PowerShell with Set-SmbServerConfiguration -EncryptData $true, while disabling SMBv1 entirely using Disable-WindowsOptionalFeature -Online -FeatureName SMB1Protocol eliminates legacy vulnerabilities like null sessions. Implementing Just Enough Administration (JEA) in PowerShell restricts remote sessions to specific commands and roles, preventing full administrative access even if credentials are compromised.
Monitoring is essential; enable auditing for detailed file share access via Group Policy under "Audit Detailed File Share" (Success and Failure), which generates Event ID 5145 logs detailing share checks, source IPs, and access outcomes for anomaly detection in administrative share usage. Best practices include configuring firewalls to block inbound TCP port 445 traffic from untrusted networks, as recommended by Microsoft to prevent external SMB exploitation. Enforce multi-factor authentication (MFA) on administrative accounts through Microsoft Entra ID policies, adding a verification layer beyond passwords. For secure management, adopt alternatives like PowerShell Remoting over WinRM (ports 5985/5986), which supports encrypted sessions and avoids SMB dependencies. Regular application of patches, such as KB4013389 for CVE-2017-0144, remains critical to address known SMB issues.

References

: Share Types - Microsoft Learn

Remove administrative shares - Windows Server | Microsoft Learn

administrative shares are missing - Windows Server | Microsoft Learn

Error when you try to access an administrative share on a Windows ...

Security and privacy for site administration in Configuration Manager

The admin$ share explained | Remote Administration For Windows

Server Message Block Overview | Microsoft Learn

SMB/Windows Admin Shares - Red Canary Threat Report

 Permissions in Windows 2000 - GIAC Certifications

Active Directory in Windows 2000 - ITPro Today

User Account Control and remote restrictions - Windows Server

Detect, enable, and disable SMBv1, SMBv2, and SMBv3 in Windows

: Glossary - Microsoft Learn

IPC$ appears as shared folder - Microsoft Q&A

why are drives c and d listed as c$ and d$ on windows nt server 4

share_info_50 Structure (Windows) | Microsoft Learn

Microsoft SMB Protocol and CIFS Protocol Overview - Win32 apps

Using Administrator Shares (Admin Shares) - FileBoss

ADMX_MSS-legacy Policy CSP - Microsoft Learn

Install and Manage Remote Server Administration Tools in Windows

How can I access a shared directory on a LAN or a ... - Microsoft Learn

Windows 10 file share access to Server 2012-2019 fails with Access ...

Net use | Microsoft Learn

New-PSDrive (Microsoft.PowerShell.Management)

Kerberos authentication overview in Windows Server - Microsoft Learn

NTLM overview in Windows Server - Microsoft Learn

Overview of file sharing using the SMB 3 protocol in Windows Server

Windows 10 1909 - AdminShare not accessible - Microsoft Q&A

Admin Shares - Microsoft Q&A

IPC$ share and null session behavior in Windows - Microsoft Learn

Issues when the Audit object access policy is enabled on ...

Control SMB signing behavior | Microsoft Learn

SMB Security Enhancements | Microsoft Learn

SMB and Null Sessions: Why Your Pen Test is Probably Wrong

Microsoft Security Bulletin MS17-010 - Critical

Practical Data Security and Privacy for GDPR and CCPA - ISACA

What's new in Windows Server 2025 | Microsoft Learn

https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2017-0144

Detect, enable, and disable SMBv1, SMBv2, and SMBv3 in Windows

Overview of Just Enough Administration (JEA) - PowerShell

5145(S, F) A network share object was checked to see whether ...

Secure SMB Traffic in Windows Server - Microsoft Learn

Plan for mandatory Microsoft Entra multifactor authentication (MFA)

about_Remote - PowerShell
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion