Amazon Polly Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Amazon Polly
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Amazon Polly is a cloud-based text-to-speech (TTS) service provided by Amazon Web Services (AWS) that uses advanced deep learning technologies to synthesize natural, lifelike speech from input text. Launched on November 30, 2016, it enables developers to integrate high-quality audio into applications, enhancing user engagement and accessibility across various platforms such as mobile apps, e-learning tools, and IoT devices.
The service supports dozens of lifelike voices in multiple languages and dialects, including English (various accents), Spanish, French, German, Arabic, and Japanese, with options for both male and female voices. Key voice types include standard TTS for cost-effective synthesis, Neural TTS (NTTS) for more expressive and human-like intonation with prosody, long-form voices optimized for extended narratives like audiobooks, and generative voices that produce highly natural speech variations. Amazon Polly also incorporates Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML) support, allowing precise control over aspects like speech rate, pitch, volume, and pronunciation through custom lexicons, as well as specialized styles such as Newscaster for broadcast-like delivery.
Designed for scalability, Amazon Polly integrates seamlessly with other AWS offerings, including Amazon Connect for contact centers, Amazon Lex for conversational interfaces, and Amazon Chime SDK for voice communications, facilitating low-latency, high-volume speech generation. It adheres to security standards like HIPAA and PCI DSS compliance, operates on a pay-as-you-go pricing model starting at $4.00 per million characters for standard voices (with a free tier for initial usage), and allows caching of generated speech for repeated playback without additional costs.

Overview

Introduction

Amazon Polly is a cloud-based text-to-speech (TTS) service provided by Amazon Web Services (AWS) that converts input text into lifelike, natural-sounding speech using advanced deep learning technologies. This service leverages various speech synthesis engines, including standard, neural, long-form, and generative options, to produce high-quality audio that mimics human speech patterns, prosody, and intonation.
The core synthesis process involves submitting text via AWS APIs, where Amazon Polly generates audio streams either in real-time through synchronous operations for immediate playback or in batch mode via asynchronous tasks for longer content, with outputs available in formats such as MP3, OGG Vorbis, and PCM. This flexibility allows integration into diverse applications, from interactive voice responses to content narration, without requiring developers to handle the complexities of speech synthesis models or hardware.
As part of AWS's broader artificial intelligence and machine learning portfolio, Amazon Polly was introduced to enable developers and organizations to incorporate realistic speech capabilities into their products, thereby democratizing access to advanced TTS technology and fostering innovation in speech-enabled experiences. Key benefits include scalable, infrastructure-free deployment and the ability to enhance user engagement through expressive, context-aware voices that support real-world conversational dynamics.

Purpose and Applications

Amazon Polly serves primarily to enhance accessibility by converting digital text into lifelike speech, enabling applications such as screen readers that assist visually impaired users in navigating content. It also facilitates the creation of audiobooks and narration for media, allowing text-based scripts to be transformed into engaging audio formats. Additionally, the service powers virtual assistants through low-latency speech synthesis suitable for real-time dialogue systems, and supports voice-enabled e-learning platforms by providing natural-sounding audio for educational materials.
In various industries, Amazon Polly finds applications in media for generating audio versions of news articles via newsreader apps, improving content consumption for listeners on the go. In healthcare, it delivers patient education through audio messages tailored for individuals with long-term conditions or chronic illnesses, promoting better understanding and adherence to care instructions. In automotive applications, the service enables voice-enabled features such as in-vehicle assistants. In gaming, it supports non-player character (NPC) dialogues and interactive voice elements, enhancing immersion in voice-driven games and animations.
A key focus of Amazon Polly is fostering inclusive design, where its text-to-speech capabilities convert web pages and documents into audio for users with visual impairments, thereby broadening access to information across diverse needs. The service's scalability advantage lies in its ability to handle high-volume synthesis requests globally without performance degradation, thanks to its cloud-based architecture that supports rapid, on-demand generation for large-scale deployments. It can be seamlessly integrated with other AWS services for seamless speech-enabled workflows.

History

Launch and Early Development

Amazon Polly was officially announced and launched on November 30, 2016, during the AWS re:Invent conference in Las Vegas. The service was introduced as part of Amazon's broader push into artificial intelligence offerings, enabling developers to integrate text-to-speech capabilities into their applications via simple API calls.
The development of Amazon Polly stemmed from Amazon's investments in AI and machine learning technologies, particularly those powering internal services like Alexa. It leveraged advanced deep learning models to generate lifelike speech, evolving from the text-to-speech engines used within Amazon's ecosystem to create a scalable, cloud-based solution accessible to external developers. This foundation allowed Polly to deliver high-quality synthesis without requiring users to manage infrastructure, addressing the limitations of traditional on-premises TTS systems that often involved high upfront costs and maintenance burdens.
At launch, Amazon Polly provided basic text-to-speech functionality with standard voices, initially supporting languages such as English, Spanish, French, and German among others. The service emphasized developer-friendly APIs for generating speech output in formats like MP3 or streaming audio, with a pay-per-character pricing model to ensure affordability and scalability for varying usage levels. Early motivations centered on democratizing access to natural-sounding speech synthesis, filling gaps in cost-effective, on-demand TTS options compared to legacy hardware-dependent solutions.

Major Updates and Milestones

Amazon Polly introduced enhancements to Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML) support in 2017, allowing developers greater control over speech output through tags for pauses, emphasis, pronunciation, and audio effects such as dynamic range compression (DRC) added on September 7, 2017, and vocal tract length modification on November 9, 2017.
A significant advancement came on July 30, 2019, with the launch of Neural Text-to-Speech (NTTS), a deep learning-based engine that produces more human-like prosody, intonation, and expressiveness compared to standard voices, including the Newscaster speaking style; it initially supported eight US English and three UK English voices.
In late 2019, Amazon Polly expanded NTTS to multilingual capabilities, beginning with the addition of neural voices in US Spanish (Lupe) and Brazilian Portuguese (Camila) on October 23, 2019.
The service reached a milestone in voice offerings by 2024, surpassing 100 lifelike male and female voices across multiple languages and variants.
On November 16, 2023, Amazon Polly added long-form voices powered by a dedicated engine optimized for extended content like articles and narrations, featuring improved rhythm, natural pausing, and emphasis in three initial voices: Danielle, Gregory, and Ruth.
Further innovation arrived with the generative voice engine on March 28, 2024, leveraging advanced generative AI for highly expressive, context-aware speech suitable for dynamic applications; general availability followed on May 8, 2024, with initial voices including Ruth and Matthew in American English and Amy in British English.
By 2025, Amazon Polly supported over 40 languages and variants with neural, long-form, and generative options, including recent additions like Czech and Swiss German voices on September 26, 2024, and seven new generative voices on August 26, 2025, as well as five additional highly expressive generative voices with expanded language and region support on November 18, 2025.

Technical Architecture

Speech Synthesis Engines

Amazon Polly employs four distinct speech synthesis engines to convert text into audio, each leveraging different technologies to balance quality, efficiency, and expressiveness in text-to-speech (TTS) generation.
The Standard engine utilizes rule-based and statistical models for basic synthesis through concatenative techniques, which combine pre-recorded phoneme segments to produce speech. This approach involves text preprocessing to break down input into phonemes, followed by segment selection and concatenation to form utterances, resulting in functional but less natural-sounding output suitable for straightforward applications.
In contrast, the Neural engine applies deep neural networks, including sequence-to-sequence models, to generate more lifelike speech. The process begins with text preprocessing via tokenization and phonemization to create phoneme sequences, proceeds to acoustic modeling where neural networks produce mel-spectrograms capturing human-like prosody and intonation, and concludes with vocoding using a neural vocodersuch as a WaveNet-inspired architectureto convert spectrograms into high-fidelity audio waveforms. This end-to-end neural approach yields significantly higher naturalness compared to the Standard engine, enabling expressive synthesis for diverse use cases.
The Long-form engine is a specialized neural variant optimized for extended narratives, employing deep learning TTS models to maintain coherence across texts exceeding 10,000 characters. It processes input through advanced text embeddings that preserve contextual awareness, adjusting prosody, pauses, and emotional inflection to replicate human narration, thereby producing consistent and engaging audio for long-form content without abrupt shifts.
The Generative engine represents the most advanced option, integrating large language modelssuch as a billion-parameter transformer trained on extensive datasetsto interpret semantic content and dynamically adapt speech styles, including emotional engagement and colloquial nuances. The synthesis pipeline encodes text into speech codes via the transformer, followed by a convolution-based decoder that generates streamable waveforms, resulting in highly adaptive and near-human quality output that varies subtly with model iterations.

Supported Languages and Voices

Amazon Polly supports over 40 languages and language variants, enabling text-to-speech synthesis in diverse linguistic contexts as of November 2025. This includes major languages such as English with dialects like US (en-US), British (en-GB), Australian (en-AU), Indian (en-IN), and others; Spanish variants including Spain (es-ES), Mexican (es-MX), and US (es-US); Mandarin Chinese (cmn-CN); Hindi (hi-IN); Arabic (arb and ar-AE); French (fr-FR, fr-CA, fr-BE); German (de-DE); and additional languages like Japanese (ja-JP), Portuguese (pt-BR, pt-PT), Russian (ru-RU), and Swedish (sv-SE). The service covers 42 distinct language codes in total, with ongoing expansions such as new generative voices added in August 2025 for languages including Canadian French, Polish, and Dutch, and further additions on November 14, 2025, of six new generative voices: Seoyeon (Korean), Camila (Portuguese Brazilian), Hannah (English Irish), Niamh (English Irish), Laura (English South African), and Lisa (English Australian).
The platform offers more than 100 lifelike voices across categories, including neural, standard, long-form, and generative types, each powered by advanced speech synthesis engines for varying levels of expressiveness and realism. Neural voices, which provide the most human-like quality, number 54 across 36 languages and include examples such as Joanna (female, US English) and Ivy (child-like female, US English). Standard voices total 60 (40 female and 20 male) in 29 languages, featuring options like Kimberly (female, US English). Long-form voices, optimized for extended narrative content, are available in select languages like US English and Spanish (Spain), with examples including Gregory (male, US English) and Alba (female, Spanish). Generative voices, enhanced for customization and polyglot capabilities, now total 33 options following the November 2025 expansion, such as Liam (male, Canadian French) and Rmi (male, French).
Dialect and style variations enhance adaptability for specific use cases in supported languages. English and Spanish offer multiple dialects to reflect regional accents, while select neural voices support styles like newscaster for broadcast-like delivery (e.g., in US English and French) and conversational for natural dialogue (e.g., in long-form US English variants). Bilingual voices, such as Aditi (female, Indian English and Hindi), allow seamless switching between languages within the same voice. Customer service-oriented styles are available in languages like US English through expressive neural options.
Voice selection is guided by criteria including gender (male, female, or child-like), simulated age (e.g., youthful tones in Ivy), and accent authenticity derived from native speakers to ensure cultural and phonetic accuracy. Users can choose based on these attributes to match application needs, with most languages offering at least one male and one female option.
Voice CategoryApproximate CountKey Languages SupportedExample Voices
Neural5436 (e.g., English US, Spanish ES, French FR, Hindi)Joanna (en-US, F), Hala (ar-AE, F)
Standard6029 (e.g., English US, Mandarin Chinese, Arabic)Kimberly (en-US, F), Zhiyu (cmn-CN, F)
Long-Form6English US, Spanish ESGregory (en-US, M), Ral (es-ES, M)
Generative33English US, French variants, Polish, DutchSalli (en-US, F), Liam (fr-CA, M)

Features

SSML Support

Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML) is an XML-based markup language that enables developers to fine-tune the synthesis of speech in Amazon Polly by controlling aspects such as pronunciation, pauses, emphasis, and prosody. Based on a subset of the W3C SSML Version 1.1 standard, it allows for the creation of more natural and expressive audio outputs from text inputs. Amazon Polly supports SSML across its standard, neural, long-form, and generative engines, with standard voices providing the most comprehensive compatibility and neural, long-form, and generative voices offering varying levels of support for certain tags.
Core SSML tags in Amazon Polly include the <speak> element, which serves as the root tag to structure SSML documents and identify enhanced text. The <prosody> tag adjusts speech attributes like rate, pitch, and volumefor instance, setting pitch to "high" can raise intonation to better convey questions, such as in "<prosody pitch='high'>Are you coming?</prosody>", though support is partial in neural, long-form, and generative engines with limitations on attribute ranges. The <emphasis> tag adds stress to words by altering rate and volume (e.g., level="strong" for louder, slower delivery), but it is available only in standard voices. Pauses are inserted via the <break> tag, specifying durations like "short" or "1s" for natural rhythm, with full support across all engines. Pronunciation is customized using the <phoneme> tag, which specifies phonetic transcriptions in alphabets like IPA, such as "<phoneme alphabet='ipa' ph='tst'>test</phoneme>", fully supported in neural, standard, and long-form engines but partial in generative.
Advanced tags extend functionality for more nuanced control. The <lang> tag facilitates code-switching by specifying a different language for enclosed text via the xml:lang attribute, ensuring accurate pronunciation in multilingual content for example, "<lang xml:lang='fr-FR'>Bonjour</lang>" within an English sentence and is fully supported in all engines. The <sub> tag substitutes abbreviations or acronyms with their spoken forms, like "<sub alias='World Health Organization'>WHO</sub>", also with full support across engines. Amazon-specific tags include <amazon:breath>, which inserts natural breathing sounds to enhance realism; available only in standard voices, it can be used manually (e.g., "<amazon:breath duration='medium'/>") or automatically via <amazon:auto-breaths> to add breaths at appropriate intervals.

Customization Options

Amazon Polly offers several customization options to tailor synthesized speech output, enabling users to adjust pronunciations, styles, audio properties, and processing for specific needs.
Pronunciation lexicons allow users to create custom dictionaries that override default phonetic interpretations for words or phrases, particularly useful for acronyms, proper names, foreign terms, or specialized terminology such as medical jargon. These lexicons are defined in XML format following the Pronunciation Lexicon Specification (PLS) Version 1.0 standard and stored in an AWS Region for reuse. Up to five lexicons can be applied simultaneously during synthesis, with priority given to the order in which they are specified if overlapping entries exist.
Neural voices in Amazon Polly support style adaptations to modify speaking characteristics, such as the newscaster style for a professional broadcast tone or the conversational style for more expressive, friendly delivery suitable for chat or customer service scenarios. These adaptations can be applied via SSML tags as a complementary tool to basic synthesis parameters. Domain-specific tuning, like handling medical terminology, is primarily achieved through lexicons to ensure accurate pronunciation of technical terms. As of November 2025, generative voices, introduced in 2024, provide highly natural, adaptive speech but do not support the same style adaptations as neural voices; SSML customization applies with engine-specific limitations.
Output formats provide flexibility in audio delivery, with support for MP3, OGG Vorbis, and PCM encodings. Sample rates range from 8 kHz to 48 kHz, depending on the format and voice engine; for example, neural and generative voices default to 24 kHz for MP3 and OGG Vorbis, while PCM is limited to 8 kHz or 16 kHz. Users select these via API parameters to match application requirements, such as bandwidth constraints or playback compatibility.
For large-scale synthesis, Amazon Polly enables batch processing through asynchronous tasks initiated via the StartSpeechSynthesisTask API, which handles texts up to 200,000 characters and outputs results directly to an Amazon S3 bucket. These custom jobs support metadata tagging with speech marks (e.g., for sentences or words) in JSON format, facilitating post-processing like alignment or analytics, and can include notifications via Amazon SNS for task completion. This applies across all engines, including generative as of November 2025.

Integration and Usage

API and SDKs

Amazon Polly provides a RESTful API that allows developers to synthesize speech programmatically through AWS endpoints, enabling integration into applications for real-time or batch text-to-speech conversion. The core operations include the SynthesizeSpeech action for synchronous, real-time synthesis, which generates audio streams directly from input text or SSML, and the StartSpeechSynthesisTask action for asynchronous batch processing, suitable for longer texts where results are stored in Amazon S3.
Access to the API requires authentication via AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) roles and Signature Version 4 signing process, ensuring secure HTTP requests to regional endpoints like polly.us-east-1.amazonaws.com. Requests are structured in JSON format, specifying parameters such as Text (the input text or SSML), VoiceId (e.g., "Joanna" for a neural English voice), Engine (standard, neural, long-form, or generative), OutputFormat (e.g., mp3, ogg_vorbis, or pcm), and optional LexiconNames for custom pronunciations. Responses from SynthesizeSpeech deliver binary audio data streams in the specified format, while StartSpeechSynthesisTask returns a JSON task ID for tracking completion via GetSpeechSynthesisTask.
The service integrates seamlessly with AWS SDKs, which abstract the underlying HTTP calls and handle authentication automatically. Supported SDKs include those for Python (via Boto3), Java, JavaScript (Node.js), .NET, PHP, Ruby, Go, and C++, as well as mobile SDKs for iOS and Android. Developers can also use the AWS Command Line Interface (CLI) for direct API invocation, such as aws polly synthesize-speech for quick testing and scripting. These SDKs and tools facilitate efficient development by providing language-specific clients that manage request serialization, error handling, and streaming outputs.

Use Cases and Examples

Amazon Polly integrates seamlessly with Amazon Lex to enable voice-enabled conversational bots, allowing developers to build interactive virtual assistants that provide natural-sounding speech responses. For instance, in chat applications, Lex handles natural language understanding and intent recognition, while Polly synthesizes text-to-speech output for user queries, such as delivering personalized recommendations or status updates in real-time dialogues. This combination supports low-latency interactions, making it suitable for customer service bots where Polly's neural voices enhance user engagement by mimicking human intonation and prosody. Recent additions of generative voices in 2024, such as Kajal (Indian English) and Bianca (Italian), provide more natural variations for global applications like multilingual bots.
In content creation workflows, Amazon Polly facilitates automated audiobook generation from e-books through its asynchronous synthesis capabilities, enabling the processing of large text volumes without real-time constraints. Developers can use the StartSpeechSynthesisTask API to handle texts up to 100,000 billable characters per task, compiling them into MP3 or other audio formats for distribution. This approach streamlines production for publishers by converting digital manuscripts into narrated audio files, supporting long-form voices (available in us-east-1) optimized for expressive reading of extended narratives. Batch tasks ensure efficient handling of multi-chapter books, with outputs stored in Amazon S3 for easy access and further editing.
For IoT applications, Amazon Polly enables embedding lifelike speech synthesis in connected devices, such as smart speakers, to deliver dynamic announcements or alerts based on real-time data. In scenarios like home automation systems, IoT devices can send sensor data to AWS IoT Core, which triggers Polly to generate audio streams for announcements, such as weather updates or security notifications, streamed directly to the device. This integration supports edge processing when combined with AWS IoT Greengrass for reduced latency in remote environments, with audio generated in the cloud and potentially cached for offline playback. Developers often use Polly's streaming output to pipe audio to speakers via protocols like MQTT, enhancing user interaction in smart home ecosystems. Recent generative voices added in 2024 further improve naturalness for such alerts.
A practical example of using Amazon Polly involves synthesizing and saving audio files with the AWS SDK for Python (Boto3), which provides straightforward integration for developers. The following code snippet demonstrates a basic synthesis task using the synthesize_speech method, specifying a neural voice and MP3 output:
import boto3
from botocore.exceptions import ClientError

polly_client = boto3.client('polly', region_name='us-east-1')

try:
 response = polly_client.synthesize_speech(
 Text='Hello, this is a test synthesis using Amazon Polly.',
 OutputFormat='(/page/MP3)',
 VoiceId='(/page/Joanna)',
 Engine='neural'
 )
 with open('output.(/page/MP3)', 'wb') as file:
 file.write(response.read())
 print('Audio saved successfully.')
except ClientError as e:
 if e.response == 'ThrottlingException':
 print('Rate limit exceeded. For neural voices, the quota is 8 transactions per second; implement retry logic with (/page/Exponential_backoff).')
 else:
 print(f'Error: {e}')
This example handles potential rate limits by catching ThrottlingException, which occurs when exceeding the applicable quotas, such as 80 transactions per second for standard voices or 8 transactions per second for neural voices; developers should implement retries with exponential backoff for production use. The audio stream is directly written to a file, supporting quick prototyping for applications requiring on-demand speech generation.

Pricing and Availability

Pricing Model

Amazon Polly operates on a pay-as-you-go pricing model, where users are charged based on the number of characters of text synthesized into speech. Standard voices are priced at $4.00 per one million characters for speech or Speech Marks requests, while Neural voices cost $16.00 per one million characters. Long-Form voices are charged at $100.00 per one million characters, and Generative voices at $30.00 per one million characters, reflecting their advanced capabilities for more natural and expressive output.
Billing is calculated monthly and encompasses the total characters processed, including those in SSML tags, with no additional fees for Speech Marks as they are part of the standard character-based charges. Custom lexicons for pronunciation adjustments incur no storage costs, allowing up to 100 lexicons per region per AWS account without extra charges. Usage within the free tieroffering up to 5 million characters per month for Standard voices, among othersincurs no charges, though this is detailed further in dedicated sections on availability.
To optimize costs, developers can select Standard voices for applications where high-fidelity naturalness is not essential, cache synthesized audio to avoid repeated synthesis requests, and leverage the free tier for initial testing or low-volume production. These strategies help minimize expenses in scalable deployments without compromising core functionality.

Free Tier and Regions

Amazon Polly offers a free tier as part of the AWS Free Tier program, designed to allow new users to experiment with the service without incurring charges up to specified limits. For standard voices, eligible users receive 5 million characters per month for speech or Speech Marks requests during the first 12 months following their initial request. This free usage applies exclusively to new AWS accounts created after sign-up and is intended to support initial development and testing.
In addition to standard voices, the free tier extends to neural voices with 1 million characters per month for the same 12-month period, enabling access to more lifelike speech synthesis at no cost during onboarding. Long-form voices, which are optimized for extended narratives, provide 500,000 characters per month under the free tier for the initial 12 months, while generative voices offer 100,000 characters per month in this timeframe. Custom lexicons and other advanced customizations do not incur separate charges but are usable within the free tier's synthesis limits, though overall usage remains capped by the character allowances. Starting July 15, 2025, new AWS customers also receive up to $200 in credits applicable to Polly and other services, valid for 12 months from account creation to further offset early costs.
Amazon Polly is available in 24 AWS regions worldwide, ensuring broad global accessibility and compliance with local data residency requirements. Key regions include US East (N. Virginia), EU (Ireland), and Asia Pacific (Tokyo), with service endpoints optimized for low-latency performance within each region to minimize response times for text-to-speech requests. Not all voice types or features, such as neural or generative voices, are uniformly available across every region; for instance, advanced neural voices are supported in select locations like US East (N. Virginia) and Europe (Frankfurt). As of November 17, 2025, all generative voices are available in additional regions including US West (Oregon) and Asia Pacific (Tokyo). Users can select the appropriate region during API calls to align with their application's geographic needs and regulatory obligations.
Regarding compliance, Amazon Polly supports HIPAA-eligible workloads in applicable AWS regions, allowing it to be used for healthcare applications handling protected health information when configured under a Business Associate Agreement. For data privacy in the European Union, the service adheres to GDPR requirements in eligible regions, such as EU (Ireland) and EU (Frankfurt), through AWS's overall compliance framework that includes data processing agreements and security controls. These regional deployments help organizations meet sovereignty and regulatory standards without compromising service quality.

Reception and Impact

Adoption and Customers

Amazon Polly has seen widespread adoption among AWS customers, with thousands of organizations globally leveraging the service to integrate text-to-speech capabilities into their applications.
Prominent users include The Washington Post, which integrated Amazon Polly in May 2021 to generate audio versions of articles, providing listeners with access to 100% of its content across web and mobile platforms. This implementation enables scalable audio production without the need for manual recordings, significantly enhancing content accessibility for visually impaired readers and those preferring auditory formats.
Duolingo, a leading language-learning platform, employs Amazon Polly to produce natural-sounding speech for interactive lessons, supporting accurate pronunciation across multiple languages for its approximately 135 million monthly active users (as of Q3 2025). By using Polly's neural voices, Duolingo has streamlined audio generation, replacing time-intensive human recordings with on-demand synthesis that maintains educational quality.
Adoption in the media sector accelerated following the 2019 launch of Amazon Polly's neural text-to-speech models and Newscaster style, which deliver more expressive, broadcast-like audio suitable for news content. Publishers such as the USA Today Network have adopted these features to efficiently create audio articles, reducing production timelines while increasing audience engagement.
In a notable case study, German publisher Sddeutsche Zeitung optimized its audio narration workflow with Amazon Polly by synthesizing only modified article sections, achieving a 50% reduction in processed characters and associated costs, alongside faster updates for time-sensitive content. Such implementations demonstrate how Polly contributes to efficiency gains in content production, with reported reductions in development and operational times for speech-enabled applications in various sectors.

Comparisons and Alternatives

Amazon Polly operates in a competitive landscape of text-to-speech (TTS) services, where it is frequently compared to offerings from major cloud providers and specialized vendors. Key competitors include Google Cloud Text-to-Speech, which leverages advanced neural models like WaveNet for lifelike audio synthesis across over 75 languages and integrates natively with Google Cloud Platform tools for scalable deployments. Microsoft Azure Cognitive Services Speech provides TTS as part of an integrated AI ecosystem, supporting custom neural voices, real-time translation, and on-device capabilities for enterprise-grade applications with robust security. IBM Watson Text to Speech targets enterprise users with flexible deployment options, including on-premises and hybrid setups, emphasizing data privacy and support for ~12 languages through multiple neural voices. Specialized alternatives like ElevenLabs focus on hyper-realistic, emotionally expressive voices with cloning features, suiting creative and branded content production.
ServiceKey StrengthPrimary LimitationIntegration FocusVoice Library Scale
Amazon PollyAWS ecosystem scalabilityRegional voice availability variesAWS services (e.g., Lambda)100+ neural voices, 40+ languages
Google Cloud TTSWaveNet neural qualityComplex pricing tiersGoogle Cloud Platform380+ voices, 75+ languages
Microsoft Azure TTSCustom neural voices in AI suiteEcosystem lock-in for advanced featuresAzure AI services500+ voices, 140+ languages
IBM Watson TTSOn-premises enterprise deploymentLimited language support (~12)Hybrid/multicloudMultiple neural voices, ~12 languages
ElevenLabsExpressive cloning and emotional depthHigher costs for premium featuresAPI-focused, developer toolsCustomizable, studio-quality
Amazon Polly's primary strengths lie in its seamless integration with the AWS ecosystem, enabling effortless incorporation into applications via APIs and SDKs for services like Amazon Lex or Lambda, which reduces development overhead for AWS users. It is particularly cost-effective for high-volume workloads, with neural voice pricing at $16 per million characters after a free tier of 1 million characters per month for the first 12 months, making it suitable for large-scale IVR and accessibility applications. Furthermore, Polly maintains an extensive neural voice library exceeding 100 options across more than 40 languages, powered by deep learning models for natural prosody and emotional engagement, with enhancements in 2025 including new generative voices added on October 20 for improved expressiveness.
Despite these advantages, Polly has notable limitations, including potentially higher latency for non-AWS users due to its optimized reliance on AWS infrastructure, which can impact real-time processing in hybrid or external environments. It also provides fewer options for advanced expressive styles, such as nuanced emotional modulation or voice cloning, compared to specialized tools like ElevenLabs, which prioritize studio-like realism and contextual adaptability.
In terms of market positioning, Amazon Polly is best suited for AWS-centric applications, where its infrastructure enables superior scalability for high-volume text processing. 2025 evaluations rank it highly for character throughput in enterprise scenarios, benefiting from AWS auto-scaling to handle demanding workloads efficiently.

References

What Is Amazon Polly? - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Introducing Amazon Polly - AWS

Amazon Polly Features

Amazon Polly FAQs

Amazon Polly Pricing

AWS Machine Learning category iconMachine Learning (ML) and ...

Neural voices - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Long-form voices - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

How Amazon Polly works - AWS Documentation

Long audio files - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

SynthesizeSpeech - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

AI Voice Generator and Text-to-Speech Tool - Amazon Polly - AWS

Benefits - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Using Amazon Polly to Deliver Health Care for People with Long ...

Voice-Enabled Mobile Bot Drives Auto Industry Innovation with Real ...

How the power of voice can supercharge gaming - AWS

Enable the visually impaired to hear documents using Amazon ...

Amazon Polly Text to Speech in 47 Voices and 24 Languages

Amazon launches Amazon AI to bring its machine learning smarts to ...

Amazon Polly Adds Dynamic Range Compression (DRC) Tag - AWS

Modify the Timbre of Amazon Polly Voices with the New Vocal Tract ...

Amazon Polly Launches Neural Text-to-Speech and Newscaster ...

Amazon Polly Introduces Neural Text-To-Speech and Newscaster ...

US Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese neural voices join Amazon Polly

Giving your content a voice with the Newscaster speaking style from ...

New Long-Form voices for Amazon Polly | AWS News Blog

Document History for Amazon Polly

A new generative engine and three voices are now generally ...

Amazon Polly voice engines - AWS Documentation

Standard voices - Amazon Polly

Generative voices - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Available voices - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Amazon Polly launches more synthetic generative voices - AWS

Languages in Amazon Polly

Applying the newscaster voice - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Bilingual voices - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Voices in Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Generating speech from SSML documents - Amazon Polly

Supported SSML tags - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Emphasizing words - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/polly/latest/dg/break-tag.html

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/polly/latest/dg/phoneme-tag.html

Specifying another language for specific words - Amazon Polly

Adding the sound of breathing - Amazon Polly

Managing lexicons - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Engage listeners with Amazon Polly's Conversational speaking style ...

StartSpeechSynthesisTask - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Amazon Polly API Reference

Getting started with Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Amazon Lex launches support for Amazon Polly Neural Text-To ...

Convert Messages from IoT Devices to Voice Commands Using ...

SynthesizeSpeech - Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

Quotas in Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

https://aws.amazon.com/free/

Amazon Polly endpoints and quotas - AWS General Reference

Compliance Validation for Amazon Polly - AWS Documentation

https://aws.amazon.com/compliance/programs/

Amazon Polly Customers

The Washington Post integrates Amazon Polly, allowing readers to ...

The Washington Post Launches Audio Articles Voiced by Amazon ...

AI Helps Duolingo Personalize Language Learning - Amazon AWS

Powering Language Learning on Duolingo with Amazon Polly

How Sddeutsche Zeitung optimized their audio narration process ...

Text-to-Speech AI: Lifelike Speech Synthesis | Google Cloud

Best TTS APIs in 2025: Top 12 Text-to-Speech services for developers

Azure AI Speech | Microsoft Azure

12 Best Text to Speech API Providers for Developers in 2025 | Blog

IBM Watson Text to Speech

Free Text To Speech Online with Lifelike AI Voices

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/polly/latest/dg/voicelist.html

Best Voice AI Systems Ranked: Complete Guide 2025 - PreCallAI
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion