Asterisk Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Asterisk
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 The asterisk (*), derived from the Ancient Greek term asteriskos meaning "little star," is a typographical symbol employed in writing and printing primarily as a reference mark for footnotes, to indicate omissions of letters or words, and to denote hypothetical or unattested linguistic forms. Its star-like appearance has facilitated its adoption across diverse fields, including mathematics for multiplication and dual objects, computing for wildcards and dereferencing, and textual criticism for highlighting discrepancies.
Originating around 200 BCE with the scholar Aristarchus of Samothrace at the Library of Alexandria, the asterisk served as a critical mark in editing Homer's works to flag passages borrowed from other sources or requiring attention, evolving from earlier Sumerian influences and alongside symbols like the obelus. By the medieval period, it marked textual interpolations in biblical manuscripts, and during the Renaissance, it gained prominence in scientific texts for footnotes and astronomical notations, gradually standardizing into its modern eight-pointed form through printing innovations.
In contemporary usage, the asterisk functions ubiquitously in digital contexts as a multiplier in programming languagesadopted in FORTRAN by the mid-1950sand as a censoring device for profanity, while in linguistics, a prefixed asterisk denotes reconstructed proto-forms not directly attested in historical records. Its versatility underscores a defining characteristic: a simple glyph bridging ancient scholarly precision with modern computational utility, though overuse in informal texting for emphasis or actions has diluted some traditional applications.

History

Origins and Etymology

The word asterisk derives from Late Latin asteriscus, borrowed from Ancient Greek asteriskos (), the diminutive form of astr () meaning "star," thus signifying "little star," in reference to the symbol's star-like appearance. This etymology reflects the symbol's visual resemblance to a small star, a characterization noted in scholarly texts since antiquity.
The asterisk symbol's earliest documented use appears in ancient Greek textual scholarship, particularly by Aristarchus of Samothrace (c. 220143 BC), the head librarian at Alexandria, who employed it as part of an editorial apparatus to denote passages in Homeric texts suspected of interpolation or requiring comparison with parallel versions. Aristarchus's system included the asterisk alongside other marks like obeloi for deletions, establishing a precursor to modern critical editing practices.
By the 3rd century AD, the Church Father Origen of Alexandria incorporated the asterisk into his monumental Hexapla (c. 240 AD), a six-column comparative edition of the Old Testament, where it signaled words or phrases present in the Greek Septuagint but absent from the Hebrew text, indicating potential additions. This application extended the symbol's role in biblical criticism, influencing subsequent scribal traditions in early Christian manuscripts. Claims of even earlier origins, such as in Sumerian pictographs dating back 5,000 years, lack direct verification and are considered speculative by historians of punctuation.

Early Manuscript and Scribal Uses

The asterisk, known in ancient Greek as asteriskos ("little star"), originated as a critical symbol in Hellenistic textual editing. Aristarchus of Samothrace (c. 220143 BC), chief librarian of the Library of Alexandria, introduced it in his scholarly editions of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey to mark passages suspected of interpolation from other sources or lines repeated elsewhere in the text, signaling the need for reader caution without excision. This usage complemented other Aristarchian signs, such as the obelos () for spurious content and the diple (>) for textual agreements, forming an early system of philological annotation.
Subsequent scholars adopted these markers; Origen of Alexandria (c. 185253 AD) incorporated the asteriskos in his Hexapla, a massive comparative edition of the Old Testament, to indicate words or phrases in the Septuagint absent from the Hebrew but present in Aquila's or Symmachus's Greek versions, or vice versa, aiding in the detection of translational discrepancies. Such applications underscored the asterisk's role in preserving textual integrity amid copying errors and variant traditions, with surviving papyri and scholia confirming its deployment in second-century BC manuscripts.
In medieval scribal practice, the asterisk persisted for similar scholarly purposes, particularly in biblical manuscripts where it flagged passages drawn from non-canonical or alternative sources to denote potential interpolations. Scribes employed it alongside marginal notations for corrections, cross-references, or doubtful readings, as evidenced in Carolingian-era codices and later monastic copies, though its use remained sporadic compared to more common punctuation like points or spaces. This continuity reflects the asterisk's evolution from a precise editorial tool to a versatile scribal aid in an era of manual transcription prone to human error.

Adoption in Printing and Early Modern Typography

The asterisk, long established in medieval scribal practices for marking cross-references and textual variants, was incorporated into early printed books shortly after the invention of movable type around 1450. Printers, often trained as scribes, retained familiar symbols like the asterisk due to its utility in guiding readers to marginal annotations or supplementary notes, a continuity evident in the production of incunabulaEuropean books printed before 1501. Its straightforward, star-like form proved advantageous for casting in durable metal type, allowing consistent reproduction across editions without the variability of handwritten variants such as dotted crosses.
In biblical and classical texts, early printers employed the asterisk as a signe de renvoi to flag interpolations, parallel passages, or editorial clarifications, mirroring its manuscript role in distinguishing authentic content from additions. For example, printed Vulgate Bibles and patristic works from the 1460s onward used asterisks to link body text to side notes, facilitating scholarly navigation in an era when full footnotes were rare and space constraints favored compact symbols over numerals. This adoption accelerated the symbol's standardization, as printers in Mainz, Venice, and Pariskey centers of 15th-century productionintegrated it into type families alongside punctuation like the period and comma.
By the early 16th century, amid the expansion of humanist scholarship and vernacular printing, the asterisk evolved into a primary footnote marker, especially for single or initial references on a page. Typographers sequenced it with the dagger () and double dagger () for subsequent notes, a convention that addressed the limitations of superscript numerals, which required finer type and were prone to misalignment in early presses. This system supported the era's proliferation of annotated editions, legal texts, and scientific treatises, where precise referencing enhanced credibility amid debates over textual authenticity. Printers like Aldus Manutius in Venice exemplified this by using asterisks in polyglot Bibles and Aristotle editions around 1500, promoting legibility and intellectual rigor in response to growing print volumes exceeding 20,000 incunabula titles by 1501.

Symbol Properties and Encodings

Graphical Forms and Evolution

The asterisk symbol traces its graphical origins to ancient Greek scholarship, where Aristarchus of Samothrace (c. 216143 BC) introduced it as a marginal mark in editions of Homer to indicate lines present in other manuscripts but deemed spurious or noteworthy by him. This early form, reflecting its etymological root in asteriskos ("little star"), likely consisted of a simple star-like or cross-shaped notation, akin to four radiating lines or points intersecting at a center, used alongside other critical signs like the obelus.
In medieval European manuscripts, the asterisk evolved into more elaborate handwritten variants, often rendered as a six- or eight-pointed star to draw attention to textual annotations, omissions, or cross-references, particularly in biblical codices where it flagged passages drawn from variant sources or Hebrew originals. Its appearance varied by scribe and region, sometimes incorporating dots or flourishes for emphasis, but it retained a stellar motif to signify significance or return points in the text; however, usage declined in frequency after the early Middle Ages as other notae like manicules gained prominence.
The transition to print in the 15th century standardized the asterisk's form for metal typecasting, favoring a compact five- or six-pointed star that balanced legibility and production efficiency, as seen in incunabula where it served as a footnote or index marker. By the 16th century, typographic refinements in works by printers like Aldus Manutius solidified its modern silhouettetypically symmetrical rays extending from a central voidwhile accommodating decorative flourishes in scholarly editions; this shift from fluid manuscript strokes to rigid glyphs enhanced reproducibility but reduced variability.
Contemporary graphical forms maintain the asterisk's core stellar identity, with printed versions usually five- or six-pointed and handwritten ones often six- to eight-pointed, though font-specific designs introduce subtle variations: serif typefaces may curve the points for elegance, sans-serifs simplify to straight lines, and decorative styles multiply rays up to sixteen. Digital standards, such as Unicode U+002A, ensure consistent baseline alignment and scalability, yet preserve typographic flexibility across media.

Digital Encodings and Standards

The asterisk (*) is encoded as the decimal value 42 (hexadecimal 2A) in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a 7-bit character encoding standard developed in the 1960s for digital telecommunication and data processing equipment. This encoding positions the asterisk among the printable ASCII characters (codes 32126), specifically as a punctuation symbol following the plus sign and preceding the comma. ASCII's adoption as a foundational standard for early computing ensured the asterisk's portability across systems, from teletypewriters to mainframes, without alteration in its byte representation.
In Unicode, the asterisk is assigned the code point U+002A within the Basic Latin block (U+0000U+007F), which directly mirrors the ASCII repertoire to maintain compatibility. Introduced in Unicode version 1.1 (June 1993), it is categorized as "Punctuation, Other," exhibits neutral bidirectional behavior (Other Neutrals), and is not mirrored in right-to-left scripts. Its UTF-8 encoding is the single byte 0x2A, UTF-16 is 0x002A, and UTF-32 is 0x0000002A, enabling efficient representation in modern text processing. HTML entities include * (decimal) or * (hexadecimal), with * as a named equivalent for semantic markup.
Extended 8-bit encodings such as ISO/IEC 8859-1 (Latin-1), part of the ISO/IEC 8859 family standardized in 1987, retain the asterisk at byte 0x2A in the ASCII-compatible range (0x000x7F), supporting Western European languages while preserving basic symbols. Similar consistency appears in other ISO 8859 variants (e.g., ISO 8859-2 for Latin-2), where the asterisk occupies the same position to ensure interoperability with ASCII-derived systems. These standards, alongside Unicode's superset approach, have standardized the asterisk's digital form, minimizing rendering variances across fonts and platforms, though glyph design may vary (e.g., four- to six-pointed stars).

Core Typographic and Editorial Uses

Footnotes, References, and Cross-References

The asterisk functions primarily as the initial superscript marker for footnotes in typographic conventions, initiating a traditional sequence of symbolsasterisk (*), dagger (), double dagger (), paragraph (), and pilcrow ()before numerical superscripts are employed for additional notes. This symbolic hierarchy, rooted in early printing practices, minimizes visual clutter and distinguishes editorial annotations from inline numbering in dense texts such as legal documents, academic works, and periodicals. In style guides like those referenced by the Associated Press, the asterisk mandates a matching footnote at the page bottom, ensuring direct linkage without ambiguity.
Placement rules position the superscript asterisk immediately after the relevant word or punctuationcommas, periods, or colonsbut before em dashes, with no intervening space to maintain textual flow. Corresponding footnotes begin with a full-sized asterisk followed by content, often separated by a horizontal rule or indentation for clarity. This format persists in digital typesetting software, where custom markers can replicate the symbol for non-numerical sequences.
Beyond standard footnotes, asterisks facilitate cross-references by signaling supplementary material, such as editorial clarifications or navigational cues in manuscripts and early printed Bibles, where they denoted marginal scriptural links. In contemporary editing, they mark references to external or internal content, including omitted details or withheld titles, promoting precise reader redirection without disrupting primary narrative flow. International bodies like the United Nations employ asterisks alongside numbers and letters as footnote indicators for official documents, underscoring their versatility in formal referential systems.

Censorship, Obscenity Masking, and Self-Censorship Practices

The asterisk serves as a typographical device for partially obscuring obscene or profane words in print and digital media, typically by replacing internal lettersoften vowelswith one or more asterisks, as in "f**k" or "sh*t." This masking conveys the word's vulgarity to informed readers while nominally complying with editorial standards or legal constraints on explicit language.
The practice traces to at least the 18th century in English literature, where asterisks, alongside dashes and ellipses, signaled suppressed letters in profane oaths or blasphemous expressions to evade common-law prohibitions on obscene libel. Religious oaths faced stricter censorship than secular profanity, with publishers substituting symbols to avoid charges of corrupting public morals under evolving statutes like the UK's Obscene Publications Act of 1857. By the 19th century, such representations as "d--n" or initial letters followed by asterisks appeared routinely in novels and periodicals, enabling authentic depiction of coarse speech without full exposure. Charles Dickens, in a preface to one of his works, derided this as a "degree of execution" akin to refilling an empty bottle, highlighting its prevalence yet ineffectiveness in truly concealing intent.
In the 20th and 21st centuries, asterisk masking shifted toward self-censorship by authors and editors wary of audience offense, advertiser boycotts, or platform algorithms. Victorian-era bowdlerizations persisted into modern reprints, but contemporary fiction often employs partial asterisks to balance realism with marketability, as full profanity risks alienating conservative readers or violating content guidelines. Journalism exhibits similar practices; for instance, some outlets mask expletives in quotes to soften impact, though this has drawn criticism for undermining the quoted material's force and treating audiences paternalistically. The Guardian's style guide explicitly advises against asterisks, mandating full spelling when profanity is germane to reporting, as partial censorship distorts evidence central to events like legal cases involving coarse language.
Digitally, asterisks facilitate evasion of automated profanity filters on social media, search engines, and publishing platforms, where full words trigger demotion or removalyet the substitution preserves semantic clarity, rendering the "censorship" largely performative. This persists despite trends toward linguistic candor in literature, where unmasked profanity enhances authenticity, as evidenced by declining use in post-2000 fiction amid relaxed norms. Empirical critiques note that masking fails to obscure meaningreaders routinely reconstruct terms like "f*ck" from contextthus serving more as a social signal of restraint than genuine suppression, often driven by institutional pressures rather than reader demand.

Corrections, Emphasis, and Informal Annotations

In ancient textual criticism, the asterisk served as a critical mark to denote additions, corrections, or passages interpolated from other sources. Aristarchus of Samothrace, head of the Library of Alexandria in the 2nd century BCE, employed the asteriskos to flag lines in Homeric texts borrowed from alternate versions, distinguishing them from the primary recension. Similarly, Origen of Alexandria, in the 3rd century CE, used asterisks in his Hexapla to indicate verses added to the Septuagint translation from Hebrew originals not present in earlier Greek versions, aiding scholars in reconstructing textual variants.
During the medieval period, scribes continued this tradition in biblical manuscripts, applying asterisks to highlight supplemental or corrective material sourced externally, such as harmonizations from parallel scriptural accounts. In proofreading and editorial practices, the asterisk functioned as a marginal symbol to direct attention to errors or required insertions, often paired with specific instructions like "insert" or "delete," as standardized in typographic conventions from the printing era onward.
For emphasis, asterisks enclose words or phrases in plain-text environments to simulate italics or bolding, a convention predating rich formatting in digital writing; for instance, emphasized term renders as italicized in Markdown parsers. This usage underscores key ideas without semantic alteration, though overuse can dilute impact, as noted in typographic guidelines favoring restraint to maintain readability.
Informal annotations leverage the asterisk for self-corrections in real-time digital communication, such as placing corrected word after a misspelling to clarify intent without formal revision, a practice emerging in late-1980s bulletin board systems and proliferating in 1990s chat rooms. Enclosing actions or asides, like pauses for effect, mimics stage directions, enhancing expressiveness in unformatted text while signaling non-literal content. These applications prioritize utility over formality, often bypassing traditional editorial rigor.

Computing and Information Technology Applications

Wildcards, Pattern Matching, and File Operations

In Unix-like operating systems, the asterisk (*) serves as the primary wildcard character for filename globbing, enabling pattern matching during file operations in shell commands. The shell expands patterns containing * before passing arguments to programs; for instance, ls *.txt matches and lists all files ending in ".txt", where * substitutes for zero or more characters excluding slashes. This expansion, known as globbing, originated in early Unix implementations around 1971, initially handled by a separate utility like /etc/glob that programs invoked to resolve wildcards. By Version 7 Unix in 1979, the Bourne shell integrated globbing directly, replacing external calls and standardizing * for any sequence in filenames.
Globbing patterns treat * as matching non-directory-separator characters within a single path component, distinguishing them from full regular expressions where * acts as a quantifier (Kleene star) for zero or more repetitions following another element. In file operations, this supports efficient manipulation of groups, such as cp *.log /backup/ to copy all log files or grep error *.c to search source files for errors. If no files match an unquoted pattern, most shells pass the literal string to the command, potentially causing errors, though options like Bash's nullglob can suppress expansion.
Extensions in modern shells enhance * for complex matching: Bash's globstar option (enabled via shopt -s globstar) interprets ** as recursive, matching files across subdirectories, e.g., find **/*.o for all object files. Similar functionality appears in programming libraries like Python's glob module or C's fnmatch, which emulate shell patterns for programmatic file selection. These uses prioritize simplicity for interactive and scripted file handling over the precision of regex, though mismatches can arise when glob * encounters special characters like dots unless quoted.

Programming Syntax, Pointers, and Arguments

In C and C++, the asterisk denotes pointer types in declarations and serves as the dereference operator. A pointer is declared by placing an asterisk between the base type and the variable name, such as int *ptr;, where ptr holds the memory address of an integer. The asterisk's placement associates it with the variable rather than the type alone, as evidenced by the need for repetition in multiple declarations like int *ptr1, *ptr2; to ensure both are pointers, whereas int* ptr1, ptr2; makes only ptr1 a pointer. Dereferencing with *ptr retrieves or assigns the value at that address, enabling direct memory manipulation.
Pointers are commonly used in function arguments to simulate pass-by-reference, avoiding value copying for large data structures. A parameter like void modify(int *value) receives an address, allowing internal dereferencing such as *value += 1; to alter the original argument. Multiple asterisks indicate higher-order pointers, e.g., char **argv for an array of string pointers, as in command-line argument processing. This syntax originated in C for efficiency in systems programming, where direct address handling is essential, and persists in C++ alongside references (denoted by &).
In Python, a leading asterisk in function parameters captures variable positional arguments into a tuple. The syntax def func(*args): packs excess arguments passed positionally into args, supporting flexible arity as in def (/page/Average)(*numbers): return sum(numbers) / len(numbers). This enables calls with varying counts, like average(1, 2, 3), where numbers becomes (1, 2, 3). A bare asterisk, as in def func(a, *, b=0):, enforces subsequent parameters as keyword-only, preventing positional misuse and enhancing readability.
Conversely, prefixing an iterable with * unpacks it during function calls, e.g., func(*) expands to separate arguments. In C variadic functions like printf(const char *format, ...);, the ellipsis handles extra arguments, processed via va_list (a pointer-like type), but the asterisk appears in the fixed format parameter rather than the variable syntax itself.
#include <stdarg.h>
void print_ints(int count, ...) {
 va_list args;
 va_start(args, count);
 for (int i = 0; i < count; i++) {
 int val = va_arg(args, int);
 // Output val
 }
 va_end(args);
}
This mechanism relies on underlying pointer arithmetic, though not explicitly via asterisk in the argument list.

Command-Line Interfaces and User Interfaces

In command-line interfaces of Unix-like operating systems, the asterisk (*) serves as the primary wildcard character for globbing, or filename expansion, matching zero or more arbitrary characters in patterns supplied to commands. For example, the ls *.txt command expands to list all files with the .txt extension in the current directory, while rm *~ removes all backup files ending in ~. This mechanism, defined in POSIX shell standards, originated in early Unix versions through a separate glob utility introduced in Unix Version 1 in 1971, before being integrated directly into shells like the Bourne shell released in 1977.
ls *.txt # Expands to list all .txt files
Shells such as Bash and Zsh perform this expansion before passing arguments to the invoked program, with unmatched patterns either left literal or handled via options like shopt -s nullglob in Bash to avoid errors. Globbing enhances efficiency for bulk file operations but requires escaping the asterisk (e.g., \*) to treat it literally, as unescaped instances trigger expansion.
In graphical user interfaces (GUIs), asterisks frequently mask sensitive inputs, such as in password fields where each character typed is visually replaced by * to prevent disclosure via shoulder surfing. This practice emerged with early GUI systems, including MS-DOS login interfaces in the 1980s, and remains standard in web forms and applications using HTML <input type="password"> elements. Empirical analysis indicates, however, that full masking can reduce typing accuracy and discourage complex passwords, offering limited protection against determined observers while complicating self-verification during entry.
Another prevalent GUI convention places an asterisk next to form labels to denote required fields, signaling mandatory input to users and reducing submission errors. This notation traces to 1970s mainframe data entry systems and aligns with usability guidelines emphasizing clear affordances over vague legends. For instance, in web design, CSS can automate asterisk rendering via :required pseudo-classes on form elements. Compliance aids accessibility, though over-reliance without semantic HTML attributes like aria-required="true" may confuse screen reader users.

Linguistic and Philological Applications

Marking Hypothetical or Ungrammatical Forms

In historical linguistics and philology, the asterisk precedes reconstructed forms of words or morphemes that are unattested in surviving texts but hypothesized through comparative methods, such as the analysis of cognates across related languages. For instance, the Proto-Indo-European root for "father" is denoted as *phtr, derived from systematic sound correspondences in daughter languages like Latin pater and Sanskrit pit, but never directly recorded. This convention, established by the 19th century in works on Indo-European reconstruction, signals the provisional nature of such forms, which remain subject to revision based on new evidence or refined methodologies.
The asterisk's application extended into descriptive and theoretical linguistics during the 20th century, particularly in syntax, where it prefixes sentences or phrases judged ungrammatical by native speakers or grammatical models. Examples include *The cat the dog chased, which violates English phrase structure rules by lacking a relative pronoun or preposition, contrasting with the grammatical The cat that the dog chased. This usage, formalized in generative grammar frameworks from the 1950s onward, aids in testing hypotheses about innate linguistic competence, though acceptability judgments can vary across dialects and contexts, prompting supplementary notations like ? for marginal cases or # for semantically anomalous but syntactically well-formed utterances. Empirical studies, such as those aggregating speaker intuitions via magnitude estimation scales, have quantified these distinctions, revealing gradients of grammaticality rather than binary categories in some languages.

Phonetic Transcription and Historical Reconstruction

In historical linguistics, the asterisk (*) serves as a standard diacritic prefixed to reconstructed forms of words or morphemes that lack direct attestation in surviving texts, signaling their hypothetical status derived via the comparative method. This convention emerged in the 19th century amid the formalization of Indo-European studies, where scholars inferred ancestral proto-languages from systematic correspondences among descendant tongues, such as Grimm's law for consonant shifts. The asterisk distinguishes these constructs from empirically verified forms, underscoring their provisional nature subject to refinement with new archaeological or textual evidence; for example, Proto-Indo-European *phtr (reconstructed "father") explains attested reflexes like Latin pater, Sanskrit pit, Greek patr, and English father through regular sound changes, including the loss of initial aspiration and vowel gradation.
Phonetic transcription of such reconstructions typically employs symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) or ad hoc notations to hypothesize ancestral phonemes, with the asterisk emphasizing the form's non-empirical basis. Laryngeal consonants (e.g., *h, *h, *h) in Proto-Indo-European reconstructions, posited by Saussure in 1879 and later evidenced by Hittite texts from the early 20th century, illustrate this: *phtr incorporates *h to account for vowel coloring and lengthening in daughters, transcribed phonetically as with aspirated stops and ablaut. Deeper or more speculative tiers may use double asterisks (**), as in ultra-conservative "Nostratic" proposals linking Indo-European to Uralic or Altaic, though these remain fringe due to insufficient regular correspondences.
The following table exemplifies a basic cognate set for the "hundred" numeral, contrasting attested forms with the starred Proto-Indo-European reconstruction:
LanguageAttested FormPhonetic Transcription
Latincentum
Greek (hekatn)
Sanskritatm
Proto-Indo-European*mtm
This reconstruction posits a centum-type initial velar (* > /k/ in Western branches, // in Indo-Iranian), with ablaut and nasal infix explaining variations; such notations prioritize causal sound laws over ad hoc assumptions.

Gender-Inclusive Notation and Associated Empirical Critiques

In German-language contexts, the asterisk serves as a symbol in gender-inclusive writing, known as the Gendersternchen, to denote inclusion of all genders within nouns and pronouns, such as "Studentin" or "Kollegin", interrupting the word to avoid male-generic forms like "Studenten". This practice emerged prominently in the 2010s among activists, academics, and some public institutions to challenge perceived male bias in generic masculine forms, with adoption increasing in media and education despite lacking standardization by bodies like the Duden dictionary. Proponents argue it promotes equity by mentally activating representations of women and non-binary individuals, supported by studies showing reduced male bias in mental imagery compared to unmarked masculines.
Empirical investigations into its effects yield mixed results, with some peer-reviewed experiments finding no significant reduction in text comprehensibility or aesthetic appeal. A 2021 study with 159 participants exposed to asterisk-modified texts reported equivalent comprehension scores to neutral controls, alongside neutral aesthetic ratings, though interest slightly declined. Similarly, a 2024 analysis of student samples confirmed no broad impairment from plural forms, attributing any singular-form difficulties to unfamiliarity rather than inherent flaws. However, other research identifies limitations: a 2024 experiment noted decreased readability in singular usages due to disrupted word flow, and screen-reader incompatibility for visually impaired users, potentially exacerbating exclusion. A meta-review of 38 studies on gender-fair alternatives, including the asterisk, concluded generally neutral impacts on processing but highlighted contextual variability, such as minor female representational biases.
Critiques emphasize practical and ideological shortcomings, with the Gesellschaft fr deutsche Sprache (GfdS), a non-profit linguistic authority, recommending its abandonment in 2020 for failing to handle irregular plurals (e.g., "rzte" vs. "rztinnen") and introducing orthographic inconsistencies absent from traditional grammar. Regional policies reflect opposition: Bavaria prohibited its use in official school documents in 2024, citing readability barriers for children and ideological imposition over empirical necessity. Academic sources promoting the asterisk often align with progressive linguistics, potentially underweighting usability data from conservative-leaning critiques, though empirical neutrality in controlled studies tempers claims of universal harm. Usage remains low overall, affecting under 1% of tokens in analyzed corpora, suggesting limited real-world disruption despite cultural debates.

Mathematical, Statistical, and Scientific Notation

Multiplication, Exponentiation, and Algebraic Operations

In mathematical notation, the asterisk (*) commonly denotes the multiplication operation, particularly in contexts such as computing, inline expressions, and historical texts where the symbol risks confusion with variables like x. This usage traces to at least 1631 in William Oughtred's Clavis Mathematicae, with further adoption by Johann Rahn in 1659 and widespread in programming languages for unambiguous arithmetic.
For exponentiation, the asterisk features in computational and array-programming contexts rather than pure mathematics. In the APL language, developed in 1962 by Kenneth E. Iverson, the monadic * computes e^x (natural exponential), while dyadic y * x yields y^x (power function). FORTRAN employs ** (double asterisk) for exponentiation, a convention influencing languages like Python and reflecting the asterisk's adaptability in numerical computation. These are not conventional in algebraic texts, where ^ or superscript notation prevails.
In algebraic structures, the asterisk superscript or subscript denotes specialized operations reflecting duality or transformation. In linear algebra over fields like the reals or complexes, V^* signifies the dual space of vector space V, the set of continuous linear functionals V (or ), with dimension matching dim(V) under finite-dimensionality; this notation, standardized by mid-20th-century texts, enables precise handling of covectors and adjoints. For complex numbers z = a + bi, z^* = a - bi is the conjugate, preserving modulus |z^| = |z| and satisfying (z w)^ = z^* w^. In manifold theory, f_ denotes the pushforward (differential of smooth map f: M N, mapping tangent vectors via Df_p: T_p M T_{f(p)} N, foundational to differential geometry since the 1930s. Adjoint operators A^* satisfy A x, y = x, A^* y in Hilbert spaces, with * indicating Hermitian transpose in matrix representations. These usages, rooted in functional analysis and category theory, prioritize notational economy over explicit multiplication.

Statistical Significance and Convolution

In statistical analysis, the asterisk () serves as a superscript marker to indicate levels of statistical significance in regression tables, hypothesis test outputs, and empirical summaries, with conventions varying slightly by field but commonly assigning one asterisk to p-values below 0.05, two (** ) to those below 0.01, and three (** ) to those below 0.001. This notation originated in the early 20th century amid the rise of null hypothesis significance testing (NHST), becoming standardized by the mid-1900s in econometrics and psychology journals to denote rejection of the null hypothesis at predefined alpha levels like 5%, often symbolized by a single asterisk for the .05 threshold. Such marking facilitates quick visual assessment of result strength in dense tabular data, though it presupposes familiarity with the underlying p-value framework, where the asterisk flags low probability of observing data under the null but does not quantify effect magnitude or practical importance.
Critiques of asterisk-based significance have intensified since the American Statistical Association's 2016 statement, which highlighted risks of dichotomous thinkingtreating results as "significant" or notpotentially inflating Type I errors in large samples or underpowered studies, and urged reporting precise p-values, confidence intervals, and contextual evidence instead. Empirical replication crises in fields like psychology (e.g., only 36% of studies replicating significant effects in a 2015 analysis) underscore limitations, as asterisks can mask small effects amplified by p-hacking or publication bias favoring starred results. Despite this, the convention persists in software outputs (e.g., R's lm() summaries) and journals like the American Economic Review, reflecting inertia from its efficiency in communicating inferential claims amid vast datasets.
In mathematical analysis, the asterisk denotes the convolution operator, a binary operation on functions that integrates one against the reflection and shift of the other: for integrable functions fff and ggg, (fg)()=f(t)g(t)dt(f \ast g)(\tau) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f(\tau - t) g(t) \, dt(fg)()=f(t)g(t)dt, producing a third function that measures overlap or "blending." This notation, distinct from pointwise multiplication (often or juxtaposition), emerged in the 19th century alongside integral transformstraced to Cauchy in 1821 for discrete sums and formalized continuously by Volterra in 1913but gained the * symbol in mid-20th-century texts for its associative, commutative properties in L1L^1L1 spaces, enabling decomposition of complex signals into convolved components.
Convolution's causal interpretation aligns with first-principles modeling of systems where outputs arise from input accumulation over time, as in probability (sum of independent random variables' densities via convolution) or physics (diffusion equations solved as Green's function convolutions). The Fourier transform converts it to multiplicationF{fg}=F{f}F{g}\mathcal{F}\{f \ast g\} = \mathcal{F}\{f\} \cdot \mathcal{F}\{g\}F{fg}=F{f}F{g}facilitating efficient computation via fast Fourier transform algorithms, standard since Cooley's 1965 implementation for signal processing applications like filtering noise in datasets with over 10^6 points. While alternatives like exist in some abstract algebra contexts, * remains canonical in analysis textbooks (e.g., Rudin's Real and Complex Analysis, 1987) for its brevity and historical precedence over explicit integral notation.

Applications in Physics, Fluid Mechanics, and Genetics

In physics, the superscript asterisk denotes the complex conjugate of a complex-valued quantity, such as a wave function or field. For a complex number $ z = x + iy $, its conjugate is $ z^* = x - iy $, ensuring real-valued inner products in quantum mechanics, where probability densities are computed as $ |\psi|^2 = \psi^* \psi $. This notation extends to operators, with $ A^* $ representing the adjoint or Hermitian conjugate, satisfying $ \langle Ax, y \rangle = \langle x, A^* y \rangle $ for vectors $ x, y $.
In fluid mechanics, the asterisk superscript identifies reference or critical conditions, particularly in boundary layer analysis. The displacement thickness $ \delta^* $, defined as $ \delta^* = \int_0^\infty (1 - u/U_\infty) , dy $, quantifies the streamwise displacement of the inviscid outer flow due to viscous effects in the boundary layer, aiding predictions of pressure gradients and separation. In compressible flows, starred variables like speed $ u^* $ or pressure $ p^* $ denote sonic conditions where the Mach number equals 1, crucial for isentropic flow relations in nozzles and airfoils.
In genetics, the asterisk serves in standardized nomenclature for variants and alleles. The Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS) uses * to indicate translation termination codons, as in p.Trp41* for a protein truncated at tryptophan 41, and for downstream numbering of nucleotide changes beyond the stop codon, such as c.32G>A. In allele designations, it separates the gene locus from specific variants, exemplified by HLA-A01:01 for a human leukocyte antigen allele, facilitating precise cataloging in databases like IMGT/HLA. This convention, established in 1987 for human genes, ensures unambiguous communication of genetic data across studies.

Domain-Specific and Cultural Uses

Sports, Games, and Notation Systems

In competitive sports, the asterisk symbol is colloquially applied to records or achievements perceived as qualified or tainted by external factors, such as rule changes, performance-enhancing substances, or shortened seasons, though official record books rarely incorporate it literally. The most prominent example originated in Major League Baseball (MLB) during the 1961 season, when Roger Maris hit 61 home runs to surpass Babe Ruth's 1927 mark of 60, achieved in a 154-game schedule; MLB Commissioner Ford Frick proposed appending an asterisk to Maris's total due to the expanded 162-game season, but this was never formally implemented in official records and was later abandoned. In the late 1990s and early 2000s steroid era, public discourse intensified calls for asterisks on single-season home run records set by Mark McGwire (70 in 1998), Sammy Sosa (66 in 1998), and Barry Bonds (73 in 2001), amid revelations of their use of anabolic steroids and other banned substances, though MLB has maintained these totals without qualifiers in its record books to avoid subjective judgments.
Beyond baseball, asterisks appear in other sports' scoring and leaderboards for practical notation. In golf tournaments, an asterisk beside a player's name on leaderboards denotes that they teed off on the back nine (holes 10-18) rather than the front nine, aiding quick visual distinction of starting positions in multi-tee starts. In broader athletic contexts, such as high school or collegiate sports schedules, asterisks mark home games, forfeited matches due to eligibility violations, or varsity letter counts in rosters, serving as footnotes for contextual details without altering the core statistic.
In games and notation systems, the asterisk functions as a terminator or qualifier. In chess, Portable Game Notation (PGN), a standard text format for recording games since its formalization in the early 1990s, uses a lone asterisk (*) at the end of move lists to indicate an ongoing, incomplete, or unfinished game, distinguishing it from results like "1-0" (white wins) or "1/2-1/2" (draw). This usage ensures compatibility across chess software and databases, where the symbol acts as a self-terminating token without implying evaluation symbols like "!" for good moves. In some tabletop or card games' rulebooks, asterisks denote special conditions, such as wild cards or purchase restrictions, though this varies by title and lacks standardization akin to sports records. Overall, the asterisk's role emphasizes transparency in notation, highlighting deviations from baseline conditions to preserve interpretive accuracy in competitive contexts.

Telephony, Keypads, and Signaling

The asterisk symbol (*) designates the "star key" on the standard 12-button telephone keypad, positioned at the intersection of the first row and first column in the 3-by-4 numeric array (excluding the 0 key's position). This configuration emerged from human factors research conducted by Bell Laboratories in the late 1950s and early 1960s, culminating in the dual-tone multi-frequency (DTMF) signaling system designed to supplant rotary pulse dialing with faster, more reliable push-button input. The DTMF keypad layout, including the asterisk, was finalized after extensive testing to optimize finger reach, error rates, and dialing speed, with the non-numeric asterisk and pound (#) keys incorporated to enable signaling for emerging network services beyond digit-only addressing.
DTMF technology, trademarked as Touch-Tone by the Bell System, entered commercial service on November 18, 1963, initially with 10-button keypads omitting the asterisk and pound for civilian use, though full 12-button versions proliferated by the late 1960s to support expanded functionalities. Actuation of the asterisk key generates a composite audio signal comprising a low-frequency tone of 697 Hz and a high-frequency tone of 1209 Hz, transmitted in-band over the analog voice channel to convey the symbol to switching equipment or endpoints. These tones adhere to the DTMF matrix standard, where rows correspond to low frequencies (697, 770, 852, and 941 Hz) and columns to high frequencies (1209, 1336, 1477, and 1633 Hz for military-grade extensions), ensuring robust detection amid voice traffic through orthogonal frequency selection that minimizes crosstalk.
In telephony operations, the asterisk primarily initiates vertical service codesshort sequences prefixed by the star key to invoke subscriber features without operator intervention. Common examples in North American networks include *67 to suppress caller ID on outbound calls, *69 to return the most recent incoming call (introduced in 1960s trials and widespread by the 1980s), and *72 to activate unconditional call forwarding, with deactivation via *73; these codes, standardized variably by carriers like AT&T and Verizon, leverage the asterisk's distinct tone to differentiate service requests from dialed numbers. Such usage extends to interactive voice response (IVR) systems, where the asterisk tone signals options like menu resets or input cancellations, and in private branch exchange (PBX) environments for functions such as call parking or operator recall.
Signaling applications of the asterisk encompass both consumer and enterprise contexts, where its DTMF signature facilitates automated call routing, remote diagnostics, and tone-based control in legacy analog systems persisting into digital VoIP transitions. In early DTMF deployments, the asterisk's inclusion anticipated scalable services like automated coin collection verification and trunk signaling, though modern protocols (e.g., SIP with RFC 4733 for out-of-band DTMF) emulate its role to maintain compatibility with embedded keypads. Empirical testing by Bell Labs confirmed the asterisk's tones yielded detection accuracies exceeding 99% under typical line conditions, underpinning its reliability in high-volume networks handling billions of annual activations.

Music, Religious Texts, and Symbolic Representations

In ancient textual criticism of religious scriptures, the asterisk, derived from the Greek asteriskos meaning "little star," was utilized by Origen of Alexandria in the early 3rd century CE within his Hexaplaa comparative edition of Old Testament versionsto denote verses present in the Septuagint Greek translation but absent from the Hebrew text, signaling additions or interpolations requiring scholarly attention. This practice, paired with the obelus for suspected omissions, facilitated critical comparison across Hebrew, Greek, and other renditions, influencing subsequent biblical scholarship despite the Hexapla's partial survival only in fragments. Medieval scribes extended this application in Bible copying, employing asterisks to highlight passages drawn from alternative sources or to link marginal annotations to the main body, thereby preserving textual variants amid transmission challenges.
In Jewish midrashic traditions and Talmudic texts, asterisk-like marks, sometimes termed asteriscus, appeared in manuscripts to indicate interpretive expansions or cross-references, aiding rabbinic exegesis though less standardized than Origen's system. During the Middle Ages, asterisks in Hebrew-derived Christian texts marked translations or glosses from Hebrew originals, underscoring the symbol's role in bridging linguistic and doctrinal divides in scriptural editing.
Within musical notation, particularly in sacred chant and psalmody, asterisks have served niche functions; for instance, in certain psalm-tone terminations, an asterisk appended to a mode letter (e.g., A*) signals an extended final cadence ascending to the note above, a convention observed in Gregorian and related repertoires to accommodate textual phrasing. In modern scores, asterisks occasionally denote performance cues, such as slight tempo delays ("let the time wait") on specific notes or pedal lifts in piano music, though these uses remain ad hoc rather than systematic.
Symbolically, the asterisk evokes its etymological roots as a diminutive star, historically representing celestial or divine notation in manuscripts where it flagged significant or extraneous content, akin to a guiding light amid textual obscurity. This stellar connotation persists in liturgical contexts, such as the Eastern Orthodox asteriska metal star-shaped implement hovering over Eucharistic elements to prevent contactthough physically distinct, it echoes the symbol's ancient form and protective, demarcating intent in ritual purity. In broader iconography, the asterisk's star-like form has occasionally substituted for asterisks in heraldic or emblematic designs denoting emphasis or omission, reinforcing its meta-textual role without evolving into standalone religious symbology.

Economics, Education, and Unique Language Variations

In economic theory, the superscript asterisk denotes equilibrium or optimal values in models, distinguishing them from initial or observed variables. For instance, $ p^* $ represents the equilibrium price where supply equals demand in competitive markets, derived through solving simultaneous equations for market clearing. Similarly, $ y^* $ indicates steady-state output in growth models, as used in dynamic spatial general equilibrium analyses. This convention, rooted in comparative statics, highlights outcomes of rational agent behavior under given constraints.
In education systems, particularly in the United Kingdom, the A* grade signifies superior performance in public examinations such as GCSEs and A-levels, typically requiring raw scores equivalent to 90% or higher to differentiate elite achievers from standard A grades. Introduced for A-level economics in 1991 and expanded across subjects by 2010, A* addresses grade inflation by setting higher thresholds, with only about 8-10% of candidates attaining it annually in core subjects. Outside grading, asterisks appear in pedagogical texts for footnotes clarifying complex concepts or denoting corrections in student work.
In linguistic analysis, the asterisk prefixes reconstructed forms in historical linguistics, marking unattested proto-words inferred from comparative data, such as *phtr for the Proto-Indo-European root of "father," absent from direct records but supported by cognates across daughter languages. This usage, standardized since the 19th century, underscores hypothetical status while enabling systematic phylogeny tracing. In descriptive and theoretical linguistics, a leading asterisk flags ungrammatical or impossible constructions, e.g., *Colorless green ideas sleep furiously, to demonstrate syntactic deviance despite semantic coherence. Informally, in digital vernaculars like online forums, asterisks enclose actions or emphasisnods for gestures or stresses for italicsevolving as a non-standard orthographic variant for conveying prosody in text-based communication.

Debates, Criticisms, and Cultural Implications

Effectiveness and Psychological Impact of Censorship Uses

The asterisk's application in censoring profanity, as in "fck" or "sht", seeks to attenuate perceived offensiveness by obscuring portions of taboo terms while preserving contextual meaning. Empirical assessments of such practices reveal limited efficacy in concealing the referent word, as recipients typically reconstruct the full profanity from orthographic patterns, phonetics, and situational cues. In a 2016 Ofcom-commissioned survey of UK audiences on broadcast language, the majority of respondents indicated that censored swear wordsoften via asterisks or bleepswere readily comprehensible, with understanding rates exceeding 80% for common terms, thereby failing to fully suppress exposure to the underlying obscenity. This aligns with linguistic conventions where partial veiling relies on shared knowledge, rendering the method more symbolic than substantive in blocking comprehension.
Research on profanity's persuasive and perceptual effects further underscores the asterisk's inefficacy. A 2022 study in the Journal of Marketing Research examined swear word variants in consumer reviews, including asterisk-censored forms like "holy sh*t"; while such modifications enable speakers to suppress overt obscenity and reduce phonetic salience, they do not eliminate the term's inferential impact on reader attitudes, with censored instances still evoking similar evaluative responses to uncensored ones in low-context scenarios. Obscenity's arousal-enhancing properties, which can bolster message persuasion by signaling intensity, persist post-censorship, as partial forms maintain the taboo's connotative force without diluting its emotional valence. Conversely, in high-stakes reporting, asterisk use has been critiqued for understating profanity's centralitysuch as in legal testimonywhile inviting mental completion that sustains or heightens the word's provocative sting, potentially eroding narrative authenticity.
Psychologically, asterisk censorship exerts subtle influences on cognition and social signaling. Readers encountering veiled profanity often experience heightened focal attention to the obscured element, akin to ironic rebound effects in suppression tasks, where attempted avoidance amplifies mental activation of the forbidden content. This can foster frustration or infantilization among audiences presumed incapable of handling unfiltered language, as noted in analyses of media self-regulation, where the convention signals cautionary deference to norms without mitigating visceral responses. For producers, habitual self-censorship via asterisks may habituate reduced authenticity in expression, correlating with broader patterns of linguistic hedging that dilute rhetorical force, though direct causal links remain underexplored. In multilingual or cross-cultural contexts, first-language swear words retain elevated taboo perception even when censored, suggesting asterisks inadequately buffer emotional arousal tied to native phonological processing. Overall, while providing superficial compliance with decorum standards, the practice yields negligible reductions in offensiveness and may inadvertently reinforce profanity's salience through anticipatory decoding.

Readability and Cognitive Costs in Inclusive Language Reforms

The gender asterisk, known as Gendersternchen in German, is employed in inclusive language reforms to denote gender neutrality or inclusivity by inserting the symbol within compound nouns, such as Lehrerin* for "teacher" encompassing male, female, and non-binary identities. This practice, promoted since the mid-2010s in official German communications and media, aims to challenge perceived male-centric generics but has sparked debate over its impact on text processing. Critics contend that the non-alphabetic insertion disrupts standard orthographic word recognition, potentially elevating cognitive load by interfering with lexical access in models like the dual-route cascade framework, where unfamiliar graphemes slow sublexical assembly.
Empirical investigations using lexical decision tasks reveal no substantial objective hindrance to word recognition speed or accuracy from the asterisk form compared to masculine or feminine variants. In a study with 103 native German speakers processing 72 role nouns, reaction times showed no significant differences across conditions (p > 0.05), with error rates marginally higher for asterisk forms (5.2%) than masculine (4.4%) or feminine (4.7%), though not statistically robust via post-hoc tests. Processing efficiency improved over trials, indicating adaptation through familiarity rather than inherent disruption. However, subjective assessments diverge: in experiments contrasting asterisk-inclusive texts, participants rated singular forms (e.g., derdie Spielerin) as more difficult and less comprehensible than plurals (e.g., die Spielerinnen*), with decreased perceived language variety and interest in one sample of 127 participants (mean age 26.93). Plural contexts yielded neutral or slightly positive effects on perceived readability in another group of 159 (mean age 31.40).
These subjective costs suggest an initial cognitive burden from orthographic novelty, particularly under higher loads like singular parsing, where the asterisk may demand additional phonological or morphological reconciliation. Increased cognitive demands in stressful or multitasking scenarios could exacerbate reversion to habitual forms, as evidenced by reduced inclusive usage under load in attitude surveys. For populations with reading impairments, such as dyslexia, the intrusion of non-standard symbols risks amplifying decoding errors, though direct studies remain scarce; analogous research on irregular orthography implies heightened effort for atypical letter-like elements. Proponents counter that familiarity mitigates deficits, with longitudinal exposure normalizing processing akin to dialectal variations, yet persistent aesthetic aversionreported in over 20% of respondents across surveysmay sustain perceived barriers to adoption.
Broader implications include trade-offs in communication efficiency: while objective metrics affirm viability, the asterisk's visual salience could fragment attention in dense texts, paralleling findings on punctuation overload in readability indices like Flesch-Kincaid, where symbol density correlates with grade-level inflation. Reforms mandating such forms in education or policy documents, as in Germany's 2021 administrative guidelines, thus impose adaptation demands unevenly, potentially widening accessibility gaps for non-native or elderly readers unfamiliar with the convention since its proliferation post-2018. Empirical consensus leans against severe objective impairment but underscores subjective and contextual costs, warranting balanced implementation to preserve informational clarity.

Broader Critiques of Symbolic Over-Reliance and Historical Biases

Critics contend that the asterisk's integration into gender-inclusive language forms, such as the German "Gendersternchen" (e.g., "Brger*innen" for citizens), exemplifies an over-reliance on symbolic interventions that compromise textual clarity and processing efficiency. Empirical experiments involving native speakers have shown that sentences with the gender asterisk elicit lower fluency ratings, reduced aesthetic appeal, and slower reading times compared to standard masculine generics or alternatives like the interior colon. These findings suggest that such symbols disrupt phonological and morphological expectations, imposing cognitive burdens without demonstrable gains in perceived inclusivity beyond self-reported ideological preferences.
The Gesellschaft fr deutsche Sprache, Germany's preeminent linguistic institution, formally advised against the asterisk in 2020, arguing it fails to accommodate irregular plurals (e.g., "Studenten" where gender endings do not uniformly apply) and fragments words in ways incompatible with spoken language or screen readers for the visually impaired. Opponents, including linguists and policymakers, describe this usage as ideologically imposed orthographic experimentation, prioritizing non-binary representation over grammatical coherence and empirical validation of its societal impact. This pattern extends to broader symbolic practices, where asterisks in censorship (e.g., "f*ck") or emphasis serve as proxies for obscured content, potentially reinforcing taboos through implication rather than resolution, as noted in typographical analyses of concealment versus revelation.
Historically, the asterisk originated in Hellenistic textual criticism around the 2nd century BCE, employed by scholars like Aristarchus of Samothrace to flag passages for transposition or authenticity in Homeric texts, often signaling editorial doubt or relocation. Such applications introduced subjective biases, as decisions on what merited marking reflected the critic's philological assumptionsfavoring Attic standards over variant traditionspotentially marginalizing non-canonical interpretations in classical and biblical scholarship. Modern extensions of this symbolic tradition into linguistic reforms mirror these historical precedents, where institutional endorsements in academiafrequently aligned with progressive paradigmsoverlook counter-evidence of readability deficits, perpetuating a bias toward symbolic equity gestures at the expense of functional language evolution. This over-reliance risks diluting the asterisk's utility as a precise marker, transforming it from a tool of scholarly precision into a vehicle for unverified social engineering.

References

https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/asterisk

Definition and Examples of Asterisks (*) - ThoughtCo

Asterisk -- from Wolfram MathWorld

What Is an Asterisk? - Computer Hope

Asterisk Symbol (*) - Usage and Examples - Grammarist

Asterisk - Cormullion

Manual: *@ - type.today

Why do programming languages use the asterisk * for multiplication?

Meaning of star/asterisk in linguistics

Punctuation series: The asterisk - MyFonts

Asterisk - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

A Star Is Born | Lapham's Quarterly

Asterisks in the Middle Ages - Medieval Codes

https://www.myfonts.com/a/font/content/punctuation-series-the-asterisk

A History of the Asterisk - RealClearBooks

A brief history of the asterisk - Bookninja

 Homer and the Bible in the Eyes of Ancient Interpreters

the asterisk -- 8/1/23 - Delancey Place

https://www.myfonts.com/a/font/content/punctuation-series-the-asterisk/

ASCII Code 42 - Asterisk

ASCII Character Encoding - GeeksforGeeks

Unicode Character 'ASTERISK' (U+002A) - FileFormat.Info

U+002A ASTERISK: * Unicode - Codepoints

* U+002A Asterisk Unicode Character - Compart

ISO-8859-1 Character Set - Cloford.com

ISO 8859-1 character set: 32 - 63

Footnote - PrintWiki

Punctuation series: The dagger and double dagger. - Monotype

Punctuation and Symbols - NIU - Communication Standards

Writing Tip 163: Asterisks & Footnote Symbols - Kris Spisak

typography - Footnote style using asterisk should have space or no ...

How to Properly Use an Asterisk - First Editing

Asterisk followed by numbers in footnotes - Microsoft Q&A

IX. Footnote indicators | Department for General Assembly ... - UN.org.

The risks of using asterisks in place of swearwords - The Guardian

 dot, dot, dot: how the ellipsis made its mark | University of ...

What is the origin / reason for adding asterisks within swear words ...

Well $#!+: A Bleeping History of Symbol Swearing in Books - Medium

'Never use asterisks,' spell out curse words if you're ... - iMediaEthics

Asterisks for the f*n of it - Strong Language - WordPress.com

 Proofreading Marks at a Glance

What Are Asterisks ( * ) And How Do You Use Them? - Thesaurus.com

The double life of the asterisk sign - Leoxicon

Asterisk (*) - Punctuation - Ultius

File and Directory Wildcards - Learning the UNIX Operating System ...

Advanced Wildcard Patterns Most People Don't Know - Medium

The history and use of /etc/glob in early Unixes - OSnews

asterisk(*) and dot-asterisk(.*) in unix regular expression

10 Practical Examples Using Wildcards to Match Filenames in Linux

How To Use Linux/Unix Wildcards - 6 Examples of - Warp.dev

What does the double-asterisk (**) wildcard mean? - Stack Overflow

A Beginner's Guide: Glob Patterns | Malik Browne

Globbing vs wildcards - Unix & Linux Stack Exchange

Pointers in C - GeeksforGeeks

Declaring pointers; asterisk on the left or right of the space between ...

Pointers - CPlusPlus.com

C++ Pointers - W3Schools

Placement of the asterisk in pointer declarations - c++ - Stack Overflow

Why does C use the asterisk for pointers? 

*args and **kwargs in Python - GeeksforGeeks

Asterisks in Python: what they are and how to use them - Trey Hunner

Python args and kwargs: Demystified - Real Python

Variadic Functions in C - GeeksforGeeks

History of Bash globbing - Unix & Linux Stack Exchange

What system pioneered displaying masking characters for password ...

The Pros and Cons of Password Masking - Schneier on Security

The required fault in our stars | Kitty Giraudel

Marking Required Fields in Forms - NN/G

The Asterisk from Historical to Descriptive and Theoretical Linguistics

ASTERISK Definition & Meaning - Dictionary.com

6.1: Syntactic knowledge and grammaticality judgements

What are these */?/*?/??/# symbols? CAS LX 522 F09

Linguistics 101 - Homework 1

Asterisk the Gaul - Language Log

Evolution of hundred in Indo-European languages - Jakub Marian

German language society: Scrap the gender asterisk - DW

The increase of gender-inclusive language in German media

The Readability of the Non-Binary Gender Star in German

The Influence of the Gender Asterisk (Gendersternchen ... - Frontiers

Does the gender asterisk (Gendersternchen) as a special form of ...

Does the gender asterisk (Gendersternchen) as a special form of ...

Why is there an asterisk here? : r/German - Reddit

Less than one percent of words would be affected by gender ...

Notes on What is Asterisk in Complex Numbers - Unacademy

notation - What does the subscript of "*" mean in vector math?

Choose P value Format - GraphPad

The P-Value: The Primary Alphabet of Research Revisited - NIH

The Development of Statistical Significance Testing Standards in ...

Full article: Abandon Statistical Significance - Taylor & Francis Online

B. Haig: The ASA's 2019 update on P-values and significance (ASA ...

Interpreting tests of a hypothesis at multiple alpha levels within a ...

The "Asterisk Operator ()" Symbol - Mathematics Monster

 Convolution (often indicated with an asterisks *; its mathematical

A History of the Convolution Operation - IEEE Pulse

Intuitive Guide to Convolution - BetterExplained

Unsteady boundary layer flow of power-law fluid on stretching sheet ...

General - HGVS Nomenclature

 An International System for Human Gene Nomenclature (ISGN, 1987)

SPORTS BASEBALL NOTES

An Asterisk on MLB Record Books Was Wrong Then, and It's Still ...

Adding Context, Rather Than Asterisks, to the Record Books

'Asterisk' players and the Hall of Fame - CBS Sports

What Is the Meaning of an Asterisk on a Golf Leaderboard? - Golfweek

Asterisks: The faults in our tiny, little sports stars

Portable Game Notation Specification and Implementation Guide

What does the asterisk mean? Cant find anywhere : r/dominion

In-Band Signaling: Dual-Tone Multifrequency Dialing - Hackaday

Why were the star and pound symbols originally added to phone ...

Touchtone, Touch Tone, Touch-Tone, DTMF, Etc. - Repeater Builder

What is DTMF (dual tone multi-frequency) and how does it work?

Learn About Phone Calling Features and Star Codes - AT&T

Fios Digital Voice & Traditional Star Codes & Other Calling Features

Asterisk and Obelus: Three different usages | Christian Forums

Psalm-tone terminations with asterisks - Musica Sacra Forum

 PRICE THEORY - Michael T. Maloney

 Dynamic Spatial General Equilibrium - Princeton University

Grading system in the UK: A comprehensive guide - Avanse

A Guide to the Asterisk In English: Rules and Errors - ESL Lounge

The many lives of the Asterisk - Superlinguo

 Attitudes to potentially offensive language and gestures on TV and ...

The Power of Profanity: The Meaning and Impact of Swear Words in ...

Indecent influence: The positive effects of obscenity on persuasion

Why are you cursing? - Harvard Gazette

The art and science of swearing - Vox

Censorship and Taboo Maintenance in L1 and LX Swearing - MDPI

Why do people swear? - BBC News

 Does the asterisk in gender-fair word forms in German impede ...

What affects people's use of and attitudes toward gender-inclusive ...

How to make a difference: the impact of gender-fair language on text ...

Does the use of Gender-Fair Language Impair the ...

The Influence of the Gender Asterisk (Gendersternchen) on ...

Debate over gender-neutral language divides Germany - Politico.eu

The Asterisk; or, the Gnomic Page - Oxford Academic
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion