Authorization Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Authorization
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Authorization is the process by which a system determines whether a user, program, or process has the right or permission to access a specific resource or perform a particular action, typically following authentication to verify identity. In computer security, it forms a core component of access control mechanisms, ensuring that entities can only interact with systems and data in authorized ways to prevent unauthorized access, data breaches, and misuse. This determination is based on policies that define permissions, often implemented through models that balance security, usability, and administrative efficiency.
Authorization is distinct from authentication, which confirms an entity's identity (e.g., via passwords, biometrics, or tokens), whereas authorization specifies what that entity is allowed to do once identified. For instance, a user might authenticate successfully but be denied access to sensitive files due to insufficient permissions. Common authorization models include Discretionary Access Control (DAC), where resource owners set permissions; Mandatory Access Control (MAC), enforced by a central authority based on security classifications (e.g., in multilevel security systems); and Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), which assigns permissions to roles rather than individuals, simplifying management in large organizations. RBAC, standardized by NIST, has become widely adopted for its scalability, allowing permissions to be predefined and users assigned to roles dynamically.
These models underpin authorization in various domains, from operating systems and databases to web applications and cloud services, where frameworks like OAuth enable delegated access without sharing credentials. Effective authorization reduces risks associated with the principle of least privilege, limiting access to only what is necessary for tasks, thereby enhancing overall system integrity and confidentiality. As cyber threats evolve, advancements in authorization continue to incorporate attribute-based access control (ABAC) and dynamic policies to address complex, context-aware scenarios.

Fundamental Concepts

Definition and Scope

Authorization is the process by which a system determines whether a subjectsuch as a user, process, or entityis permitted to perform a specific action on a resource, based on established policies or rules. This determination grants or enforces access privileges, ensuring that only authorized interactions occur within a computing environment.
The scope of authorization encompasses both affirmative outcomes, where access is granted, and negative outcomes, where it is denied, to maintain system security and compliance. Central to this process are foundational elements like permissions, which specify allowable actions; roles, which group permissions for assignment to subjects; and privileges, which represent broader rights derived from those permissions. Authorization forms a core component of access control, the broader framework governing resource interactions in information systems.
The concept of authorization traces its origins to early computing systems in the 1970s, particularly through access control lists (ACLs) implemented in the Multics operating system, which enabled fine-grained control over file and resource sharing among multiple users. Over time, it has evolved into a key pillar of modern information security, integrated into the CIA triadconfidentiality, integrity, and availabilitywhich underpins protections against unauthorized disclosure, alteration, or disruption of data.
Guiding principles of authorization include the principle of least privilege, which mandates granting subjects only the minimum access necessary to accomplish their tasks, thereby minimizing potential damage from errors or compromises. Complementing this is the separation of duties, which distributes conflicting responsibilities across multiple subjects to prevent any single entity from completing a high-risk action independently, reducing risks of fraud or abuse.

Distinction from Authentication

Authentication is the process of verifying the identity of a user, device, or system, confirming that they are who or what they claim to be, typically through methods such as passwords, biometrics, multi-factor tokens, or digital certificates. This verification step occurs prior to authorization, establishing the subject's legitimacy before assessing their permissions.
The primary distinction between authentication and authorization lies in their core questions and sequencing: authentication addresses "who are you?" by validating identity, while authorization answers "what are you allowed to do?" by enforcing access rights and permissions on resources or actions. In standard security workflows, authentication must succeed first; only then does authorization proceed to evaluate and grant or deny specific privileges based on policies, roles, or attributes.
These concepts form part of the Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) framework, a foundational security triad used to manage and audit access in networks and systems. Authentication handles identity verification, authorization manages policy enforcement and privilege assignment post-verification, and accounting (or auditing) tracks resource usage for compliance and monitoring. This integrated approach ensures comprehensive control, with authorization specifically addressing the risks of over-permissive access after identity is confirmed.
Common misconceptions arise when conflating the two processes, such as assuming OAuth fully encompasses both; in reality, OAuth 2.0 is an authorization framework for delegating access to resources, often requiring separate mechanisms like OpenID Connect for authentication. Similarly, single sign-on (SSO) systems primarily streamline authentication across multiple applications using shared credentials or tokens, but they do not inherently perform authorization checks, which must be implemented per resource to prevent unauthorized actions.
A typical workflow illustrates this sequence: a subject requests access to a protected resource; the system first authenticates the subject by challenging and validating their credentialsif this fails, access is immediately denied. Successful authentication triggers authorization, where the system queries policies or attributes to check permissions; if authorized, the action proceeds, but failure results in denial, ensuring no access without both validations.

Technical Frameworks

Access Control Models

Access control models provide the foundational frameworks for implementing authorization in computing systems, defining how decisions are made about granting or denying access to resources. These models evolved to address varying needs for security, flexibility, and manageability, ranging from rigid system-enforced policies to dynamic, attribute-driven evaluations. Key models include Discretionary Access Control (DAC), Mandatory Access Control (MAC), Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), and Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC), each suited to different environments such as operating systems, enterprises, and distributed networks.
Discretionary Access Control (DAC) allows resource owners to define and manage access permissions for other users, typically through access control lists (ACLs) that specify allowed operations like read, write, or execute. In DAC, the owner retains full discretion over privilege assignments and propagation, enabling flexible, user-centric control without central oversight. This model has been historically prominent in Unix file systems, where file permissions are set via ACLs in i-nodes, using identifiers for owner, group, and others to enforce access based on effective user and group IDs. While DAC offers simplicity for small-scale systems, it is vulnerable to issues like privilege accumulation and trojan horse attacks, as users can inadvertently grant excessive rights.
Mandatory Access Control (MAC) enforces access decisions centrally through system-assigned security labels on subjects (users or processes) and objects (resources), preventing users from overriding policies regardless of ownership. Policies are based on labels such as clearance levels for subjects and classification levels for objects, ensuring strict enforcement for high-security contexts like confidentiality protection. The Bell-LaPadula model exemplifies MAC for confidentiality, introducing rules like the simple security property (no read up) and the *-property (no write down) to prevent unauthorized information flows in multilevel security systems. SELinux implements MAC in Linux kernels via the Flask architecture, applying type enforcement and multilevel security to label processes and files, thereby containing potential breaches from compromised applications. MAC provides robust security in sensitive environments but lacks flexibility, making it challenging for dynamic or user-driven scenarios.
Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) regulates access by assigning users to roles based on their job functions within an organization, with permissions then linked to those roles rather than individual users. Core components include users (individuals), roles (job positions), and permissions (approved operations on resources), allowing indirect access management through role assignments and hierarchies. The ANSI/INCITS 359-2004 standard formalizes RBAC, defining elements like core RBAC (basic user-role-permission relations) and extensions for separation of duties, and was revised as INCITS 359-2012 to enhance interoperability. RBAC excels in enterprise scalability, efficiently handling access for organizations with over 500 users by reducing administrative overhead and minimizing errors in large-scale permission management, as evidenced by industry savings of $1.1 billion from reduced downtime. However, it can suffer from role explosion in complex hierarchies, limiting adaptability to non-role-based contexts.
Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC) makes authorization decisions dynamically by evaluating policies against attributes of the subject (e.g., user role or clearance), resource (e.g., classification or owner), action, and environment (e.g., time or location). Policies are expressed as rules that combine these attributes to grant or deny access, enabling context-aware and fine-grained control without predefined user mappings. The eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML), an OASIS standard, facilitates ABAC policy expression through components like policy decision points (PDPs) for evaluation and policy enforcement points (PEPs) for application, supporting interoperability across systems. ABAC supports external users and complex policies effectively but requires significant resources for attribute management and policy maintenance.
The evolution of these models traces back to the 1970s, when DAC and MAC emerged in systems like Multics and early Unix to address basic protection needs, with MAC focusing on military-grade confidentiality via models like Bell-LaPadula (1973). By the 1990s, RBAC was proposed as a scalable alternative to the limitations of DAC and MAC, formalized in 1992 by Ferraiolo and Kuhn, and standardized in 2004 to meet enterprise demands. ABAC further advanced this progression in the 2000s, incorporating dynamic attributes for modern, distributed environments.
ModelProsCons
DACFlexible owner control; simple for small systemsVulnerable to privilege escalation; high administrative burden in large setups
MACStrong central enforcement; high security for confidentialityInflexible for dynamic access; complex policy updates
RBACScalable for enterprises; simplifies role-based administrationRole explosion in hierarchies; static for contextual needs
ABACFine-grained, dynamic policies; supports external usersComplex implementation; resource-intensive maintenance

Implementation in Software Systems

In software systems, authorization is typically implemented through distinct architectural components that separate decision-making from enforcement. The Policy Decision Point (PDP) evaluates access requests against defined policies to render authorization decisions, while the Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) intercepts requests and enforces those decisions by allowing or denying access. These components often integrate into middleware layers, such as API gateways, where the PEP resides at the entry point to services, querying the PDP for real-time evaluations before permitting resource access. This separation enhances modularity, allowing policies to be updated centrally without altering application code.
Programming approaches to authorization emphasize explicit checks embedded in code, often using simple conditional logic for permission validation. For instance, a basic permission guard in pseudocode might appear as follows:
if (user.hasPermission("read", resource)) {
 return resource.(/page/Data);
} else {
 throw new AccessDeniedException("Insufficient permissions");
}
This pattern ensures fine-grained control at critical points like method invocations or API endpoints. Libraries streamline these implementations; Spring Security in Java provides annotation-based authorization, such as @PreAuthorize("hasRole('ADMIN')"), to declaratively enforce rules during request processing. Similarly, Casbin offers a multi-language library supporting models like RBAC, where policies are defined in a configuration file and enforced via an enforcer.Enforce(user, obj, act) call to check access dynamically.
Authorization data is commonly stored in databases to manage permissions scalably. In relational databases, a typical schema for RBAC involves tables linking users to roles and roles to permissions, such as:
TableColumnsPurpose
usersid (PK), usernameStores user identities
rolesid (PK), nameDefines roles like "admin"
permissionsid (PK), action, resourceSpecifies actions on resources
user_rolesuser_id (FK), role_id (FK)Assigns roles to users
role_permissionsrole_id (FK), permission_id (FK)Links permissions to roles
This structure enables efficient querying for access decisions via joins. For dynamic policies, NoSQL databases like MongoDB store permissions as flexible documents, accommodating attribute-based rules without rigid schemas.
Implementing authorization introduces challenges, particularly performance overhead in real-time systems where frequent checks can introduce latency exceeding milliseconds, impacting user experience in high-throughput applications. In distributed environments like microservices, coordinating authorization across services exacerbates this; service meshes such as Istio address it by embedding Envoy proxies as PEPs that enforce policies at the network level, using attributes from requests to query centralized PDPs without per-service overhead.
Best practices recommend evaluating centralized versus decentralized authorization based on system scale and security needs; centralized models consolidate policy management in a single PDP for consistency but risk single points of failure, while decentralized approaches distribute enforcement via local caches or proxies to reduce latency, often hybridizing both for cloud environments. Auditing is essential for compliance, with logs capturing authorization eventsincluding user, action, resource, and outcometo meet requirements like GDPR's accountability principle, ensuring immutable storage and restricted access to these records.
A practical case study in web applications contrasts session-based and token-based authorization. Session-based checks store user permissions server-side in a session store (e.g., Redis), validating them on each request via a session ID cookie, which suits monolithic apps but scales poorly due to stateful storage. Token-based approaches embed permissions in self-contained JWTs sent with requests, enabling stateless verification client-side or at edges, ideal for SPAs or APIs but requiring careful token expiration to mitigate replay risks.

Domain-Specific Applications

Public Policy and Legal Contexts

In public policy and legal contexts, authorization refers to government-granted permissions that enable individuals, organizations, or entities to perform actions otherwise prohibited by law, such as issuing licenses and permits under administrative law frameworks. These authorizations serve as official recognitions of compliance with regulatory requirements, forming a core component of administrative law by delegating authority to agencies to approve, monitor, and enforce such permissions while balancing public interest and individual rights.
The evolution of authorizations in administrative law traces back to the 19th century, when statutes began providing structured independence and accountability to administrative processes amid growing industrialization and government intervention in economic activities. By the early 20th century, the expansion of the administrative state formalized these mechanisms, culminating in the Administrative Procedure Act of 1946, which standardized procedures for granting and revoking licenses and approvals. Post-9/11 developments further intensified this framework, with authorizations shifting toward enhanced national security measures, including expanded military and intelligence powers through acts like the Authorization for Use of Military Force.
Key examples illustrate this application in policy-making. In the United States, the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), enacted annually since 1961, authorizes appropriations and sets policies for Department of Defense activities, nuclear programs, and military construction, exemplifying congressional oversight of executive authorizations. In the European Union, authorizations under GDPR Article 9 permit the processing of sensitive personal datasuch as racial origins or health informationonly under strict conditions like explicit consent or necessity for legal claims, ensuring regulatory compliance in data protection.
Legal principles governing authorizations emphasize due process, requiring fair procedures in granting or revoking permissions to protect against arbitrary government action, as enshrined in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. Judicial review of agency decisions provides a check on these processes; however, the 2024 Supreme Court ruling in Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo overturned the Chevron doctrine, ending automatic deference to agencies' interpretations of ambiguous statutes and empowering courts to independently assess authorization validity.
Internationally, UN frameworks mandate state authorizations for resource extraction, particularly on indigenous lands, requiring free, prior, and informed consent before approving projects to prevent harm and uphold sovereignty. Challenges persist in cross-border data flows, where divergent national authorization regimes create barriers, increasing compliance costs and hindering global trade by up to 1.7% of GDP in affected sectors.
Current issues highlight concerns over authorization overreach, notably in surveillance under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA). Amendments to FISA Section 702, reauthorized in 2024, allow warrantless collection of non-U.S. persons' communications, raising privacy risks for Americans through incidental data capture and lacking robust oversight, as evidenced by documented compliance failures and warrantless queries of U.S. persons' data in Section 702 databases exceeding 200,000 in 2022 (though numbers have since decreased). In e-governance systems, these policy authorizations are increasingly implemented via digital platforms to streamline administrative approvals.

Financial and Banking Systems

In financial and banking systems, authorization serves as a critical mechanism for approving transactions while mitigating risks such as fraud, insufficient funds, and illicit activities. Real-time transaction authorization typically occurs through payment networks like VisaNet, where an issuer evaluates factors including account balance availability and fraud indicators before responding to an authorization request from a merchant's acquirer. This process ensures that only legitimate transactions proceed, often within seconds, to facilitate seamless commerce.
Regulatory frameworks underpin these authorizations to enforce security and compliance. The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) mandates secure handling of cardholder data during authorization, including encryption for transmission and restrictions on storing sensitive authentication data post-authorization to prevent breaches. Similarly, anti-money laundering (AML) regulations, as outlined by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), require financial institutions to apply enhanced due diligence for high-risk transactions, such as verifying customer identities and transaction purposes before approval. These standards promote standardized, auditable authorization practices across global banking operations.
Technological implementations enhance the robustness of authorization in banking. EMV chip protocols, developed by EMVCo, enable secure point-of-sale (POS) authorizations by generating dynamic cryptograms for each transaction, verifying card authenticity and reducing counterfeit risks compared to static data methods. In mobile banking, two-factor authorizationoften combining something the user knows (e.g., PIN) with something they have (e.g., device token)is standard for high-value actions like transfers, as recommended by federal banking regulators to layer defenses against unauthorized access.
Risk management models integrate authorization with proactive controls to deny suspicious activities. Velocity checks monitor transaction frequency, such as limiting approvals to a set number per hour from the same account or IP address, flagging potential fraud rings for review or denial. Machine learning algorithms further support anomaly-based denials by analyzing patterns in transaction datasuch as unusual locations or amountsto score risks in real-time, as demonstrated in frameworks for high-value payment systems where supervised and unsupervised models achieve high detection rates for outliers.
Historically, authorization in banking evolved from manual processes to automated systems. The introduction of magnetic stripe technology in the 1960s, pioneered by IBM, allowed for encoded card data readable by swipe devices, enabling the first widespread electronic authorizations for credit and debit transactions. By the 2010s, a shift to contactless authorization accelerated, driven by NFC-enabled cards and mobile wallets like Apple Pay, which streamlined approvals without physical contact while maintaining security through tokenized data.
Global variations reflect diverse infrastructures and challenges. The SWIFT network facilitates international wire transfer authorizations by standardizing secure messaging between over 11,000 institutions, ensuring validated instructions for cross-border payments with built-in compliance checks. In cryptocurrency systems, transaction authorization relies on wallet permissions, such as multi-signature approvals, but faces hurdles like permissionless blockchains' lack of centralized controls, complicating regulatory oversight and fraud prevention in decentralized environments.

Publishing and Media Rights

In the realm of publishing and media rights, authorization fundamentally revolves around the permissions granted by copyright holders to control the reproduction and adaptation of creative works. Under international copyright law, authors and creators possess the exclusive right to authorize the reproduction of their literary and artistic works in any manner, including direct or indirect reproduction in digital or physical forms. This extends to adaptations, such as translations, arrangements, or transformations of the original work, ensuring that unauthorized uses do not infringe upon the creator's economic interests. Fair use exceptions, however, serve as implicit non-authorizations, permitting limited uses without permission for purposes like criticism, commentary, or education, provided they meet criteria of purpose, nature, amount, and market effect.
Licensing models provide structured frameworks for granting these authorizations, balancing creator control with broader access. Creative Commons licenses, for instance, offer standardized tools where creators can specify permissions; the CC BY-SA license allows distribution, remixing, and adaptation in any medium, but mandates attribution to the original author and requires derivative works to adopt the same license terms. In the music industry, mechanical licenses authorize the reproduction of musical compositions in recordings, such as for sampling, requiring permission from the composition's copyright holders to manufacture and distribute copies, often facilitated through compulsory licensing rates set by law.
Digital rights management (DRM) systems enforce these authorizations technologically, particularly for digital media. Adobe Content Server, a widely used DRM tool, enables publishers to control e-book access by encrypting content and tying it to authorized devices or users via Adobe IDs, preventing unauthorized sharing or copying. Despite such measures, challenges persist with piracy circumvention, as tools and methods to bypass DRM protections undermine enforcement, leading to widespread unauthorized distribution and economic losses for rights holders, exacerbated by the DMCA's anti-circumvention provisions that criminalize such acts but struggle against evolving technologies.
Historically, the Berne Convention of 1886 established foundational international norms for these authorizations, mandating automatic protection without formalities and exclusive rights for authors across member states, influencing global standards for reproduction and adaptation. In the United States, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1998 introduced safe harbors for online platforms, shielding them from liability for user-generated infringements if they promptly remove unauthorized content upon notification, thereby facilitating digital distribution while protecting intermediaries.
Industry practices further operationalize these authorizations through dedicated platforms and organizations. Self-publishing services like Amazon Kindle Direct Publishing (KDP) require authors to grant territorial distribution rights, authorizing Amazon to reproduce and sell their works globally in exchange for royalties, with authors retaining ownership but ceding specific usage permissions. Royalty collection societies, such as the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), manage public performance authorizations on behalf of creators, collecting and distributing fees from licensees like broadcasters and venues, ensuring creators receive compensation without direct negotiation.
Emerging trends leverage blockchain for authorization, particularly with non-fungible tokens (NFTs) enabling verifiable ownership transfers of digital art. NFTs represent unique digital assets on blockchains like Ethereum, allowing artists to authorize and track sales or licenses of their works, though they do not inherently convey full copyright transfer unless explicitly stated in accompanying smart contracts, addressing provenance issues in digital media while raising questions about perpetual control.

Standards and Protocols

OAuth and Delegated Authorization

OAuth emerged as a framework for delegated authorization, allowing third-party applications to access user resources without sharing credentials. The initial version, OAuth 1.0, introduced in 2007, relied on signature-based authentication to verify requests, requiring clients to sign each API call with cryptographic methods. This approach, formalized in RFC 5849 in 2010, aimed to secure access to services like Twitter's API but proved complex for implementation due to its reliance on shared secrets and nonces. In contrast, OAuth 2.0, published as RFC 6749 by the IETF in October 2012, simplified the process by using bearer tokensopaque strings that grant access upon presentationeliminating per-request signing while supporting various grant types for different client scenarios. Key grant types in OAuth 2.0 include the authorization code grant for server-side applications, the implicit grant for client-side scripts (now deprecated), and the client credentials grant for machine-to-machine communication without user involvement.
The authorization code grant, the most secure and recommended flow for confidential clients, operates in several steps to mitigate risks like credential exposure. First, the client redirects the user to the authorization server's endpoint with parameters including the client ID, requested scopes, redirect URI, and a state parameter for CSRF protection. The user authenticates and consents at the authorization server, which then redirects back to the client's specified URI with a short-lived authorization code. The client subsequently exchanges this codevia a backend POST to the token endpointfor an access token and optional refresh token, authenticating itself with client credentials if confidential. Security considerations are critical; without proper validation of the state parameter, attackers could exploit cross-site request forgery (CSRF) by tricking users into authorizing malicious requests. To counter code interception attacks, particularly in public clients like mobile apps, the Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE) extensiondefined in RFC 7636 and published in September 2015introduces a code challenge derived from a verifier, ensuring only the originating client can exchange the code.
Common use cases for OAuth highlight its role in delegated access. In social login scenarios, such as "Sign in with Google," users authorize third-party apps to access profile data or email without revealing passwords, enabling seamless integration across services. For API delegation, platforms like the Twitter API (now X API) allow developers to request user-specific permissions, such as posting tweets, through scoped tokens that limit exposure. These applications underscore OAuth's focus on fine-grained, revocable access rather than full credential delegation.
OAuth 2.0's standardization by the IETF in RFC 6749 established it as the core protocol for web-based authorization, with extensions addressing evolving needs. The ongoing OAuth 2.1 draft, first circulated in 2020 and updated through 2025, consolidates best practices by mandating PKCE for all clients, removing the implicit grant due to security flaws, and enforcing stricter redirect URI validation to close gaps in OAuth 2.0 implementations.
Despite its strengths, OAuth is strictly an authorization framework and not intended for authentication alone; for identity verification, it pairs with protocols like OpenID Connect. Common vulnerabilities persist, including CSRF in redirect flows if the state parameter is omitted or mismatched, potentially allowing attackers to hijack authorizations. By 2023, OAuth 2.0 had seen widespread adoption, powering delegated access in over 10% of the top 1,000 websites for user login features, with even broader use in API ecosystems across major platforms.

Enterprise and Federated Protocols

In enterprise environments, authorization protocols enable secure access across organizational boundaries by leveraging federated identity management, where trust relationships allow users authenticated by one domain to access resources in another without redundant credentials. Key standards include the Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) 2.0, ratified as an OASIS standard in 2005, which uses XML-based assertions to exchange authentication, attributes, and authorization decisions for single sign-on (SSO) in enterprise settings. SAML assertions typically include subject confirmations, attribute statements, and authorization decision statements, facilitating attribute-based access control in federated systems.
Building on web authorization foundations like OAuth 2.0, OpenID Connect (OIDC) 1.0, finalized in 2014 by the OpenID Foundation, extends it as an identity layer that incorporates ID tokens in JSON Web Token (JWT) format to augment authorization with user identity verification. These ID tokens, signed and optionally encrypted, convey claims such as user identifiers and authentication context, enabling relying parties to make informed authorization decisions in cross-domain scenarios.
Federated identity management operates through identity providers (IdPs), which authenticate users and issue assertions, and service providers (SPs), which rely on those assertions to authorize access to protected resources. This model establishes mutual trust via metadata exchange, allowing seamless authorization across domains; for instance, Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure AD) and Okta serve as IdPs that integrate SAML or OIDC for enterprise-wide, cross-organizational authorization.
The evolution of these protocols traces from early efforts like WS-Federation, a Microsoft-led specification from the early 2000s that defined mechanisms for identity and attribute federation across security realms using SOAP-based exchanges. Modern advancements integrate these into zero-trust architectures, as outlined in NIST SP 800-207, which emphasize continuous authorization verification regardless of network location, incorporating federated protocols to enforce policy at resource access points.
Security in these protocols relies on robust mechanisms such as token signing with asymmetric algorithms like RSA or ECDSA to ensure integrity and authenticity of assertions and tokens, preventing tampering in transit. Revocation is handled through methods like OAuth 2.0 Token Introspection (RFC 7662), where resource servers query authorization servers to validate token status and active attributes in real-time.
In higher education, the InCommon Federation employs SAML to enable secure, attribute-driven authorization for over 750 U.S. higher education institutions and more than 1,000 total participants, allowing students and faculty to access shared research resources across campuses without separate logins. In cloud environments, AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) roles support federated authorization by assuming roles based on SAML or OIDC assertions from external IdPs, granting temporary permissions to resources like S3 buckets or EC2 instances.

References

authorization - Glossary | CSRC

 Introduction to Information Security - CISA

Understanding Authentication, Authorization, and Encryption

CIA Triad - What is Authentication vs. Authorization?

Access Control Models Cyber - University of Hawaii - West Oahu

 Role-Based Access Control Models

 Access Control Models - Jackson State University

Access Control - CS@Cornell

 Access Control: Policies, Models, and Mechanisms - UTC

 Protection and the Control of Information Sharing in Multics

Executive Summary NIST SP 1800-26 documentation - NCCoE

 The Protection of Information in Computer Systems

Separation of Duty (SOD) - Glossary | CSRC

NIST Special Publication 800-63B

Authentication - OWASP Cheat Sheet Series

Authorization - OWASP Cheat Sheet Series

Authentication vs authorization: Key differences - SailPoint

Authentication vs. Authorization: What's the Difference? | Curity

AAA - Glossary | CSRC - NIST Computer Security Resource Center

What is authentication, authorization and accounting (AAA)?

What is AAA Security? Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting

OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework - Auth0

 A beginner's guide to SSO (mis)configuration

 Guide to Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) Definition and ...

 Discretionary Access Control - CS@Cornell

 Topic 5: The Bell LaPadula Model - Data Security and Privacy

 Configuring the SELinux Policy - National Security Agency

Role Based Access Control | CSRC

https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/other/2010/12/19/economic-analysis-of-rbac-final-report/final

Role Based Access Control | CSRC

Microservices Security - OWASP Cheat Sheet Series

Authorization :: Spring Security

Overview | Casbin

 General Access Control Guidance for Cloud Systems

Why Low Latency Is Important in Authorization - Cerbos

Istio / Authorization Policy

 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT

Administrative Authorizations Definition | Law Insider

Reconstructing the Administrative State in an Era of Economic and ...

Declarations of War and Authorizations for the Use of Military Force

History of the NDAA | House Armed Services Committee

Art. 9 GDPR Processing of special categories of personal data

Procedural Due Process Civil :: Fourteenth Amendment - Justia Law

 22-451 Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo (06/28/2024)

Indigenous Peoples' Territories, Resources Still Being Seized ...

How Barriers to Cross-Border Data Flows Are Spreading Globally ...

FISA Section 702 and the 2024 Reforming Intelligence and Securing ...

Spy Law Needs Fixing Now to Stop Overreach Not a Backdoor ...

 Visa Payment Acceptance for U.S. Quick-Service Restaurants

Payment Card Data Security Standards (PCI DSS)

EMV Contact Chip | EMVCo

Authentication in Internet Banking: A Lesson in Risk Management

 Velocity Checks | U.S. Payments Forum

 a machine learning framework for anomaly detection in payment ...

The magnetic stripe | IBM

 How contactless is reinventing the way people pay - Visa

 SWIFT for high-value payment market infrastructures

 Novel risks, mitigants and uncertainties with permissionless ...

Summary of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and ...

What is Copyright? | U.S. Copyright Office

Deed - Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International - Creative Commons

ASCAP Music Licensing FAQs

Solutions Ebook Content server - Adobe

Unintended Consequences: Fifteen Years under the DMCA

The Digital Millennium Copyright Act | U.S. Copyright Office

Paperback and Hardcover Distribution Rights

Royalties and Payment - ASCAP

 NON-FUNGIBLE TOKENS (NFTS) AND COPYRIGHT LAW

OAuth 2.1 vs OAuth 2.0: What's the Difference? - InstaSafe

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5849

RFC 6749 - The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.3

Authorization Code Flow - Auth0

Microsoft identity platform and OAuth 2.0 authorization code flow

Authorization Code Grant - OAuth 2.0 Simplified

Understanding OAuth 2.0 and its Common Vulnerabilities - Vaadata

RFC 7636 - Proof Key for Code Exchange by OAuth Public Clients

Using OAuth 2.0 to Access Google APIs | Authorization

OAuth 2.0

draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-14 - The OAuth 2.1 Authorization Framework

OAuth 2.0 authentication vulnerabilities | Web Security Academy

 A large-scale evaluation on the privacy of OAuth authentication on ...

Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) v2.0 - OASIS Open

 saml-core-2.0-os.pdf - Index of /

OpenID Connect Core 1.0 incorporating errata set 2

Identity Providers: Streamline Secure Access Efficiently - Ping Identity

ws-federation-1.2-spec-os.html - Index of /

 Zero Trust Architecture - NIST Technical Series Publications

JSON Web Token (JWT) Signing Algorithms Overview - Auth0

RFC 7662 - OAuth 2.0 Token Introspection - IETF Datatracker

InCommon Federation

Identity providers and federation - AWS Documentation
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion