Backward induction Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Backward induction
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Backward induction is a fundamental technique in game theory for solving finite extensive-form games with perfect information, where players make sequential decisions. It proceeds by iteratively analyzing the game from its terminal nodes backward to the initial node, determining at each decision point the action that maximizes the player's payoff given the optimal play that follows. This process assumes that all players are rational and that this rationality is common knowledge, even for hypothetical subgames that may not be reached in equilibrium.
Although the method traces back to early analyses like Zermelo's 1913 work on chess, the associated concept of subgame perfect Nash equilibrium was introduced by Reinhard Selten in 1965 to refine earlier equilibrium concepts by eliminating non-credible threats or promises in sequential settings. This equilibrium ensures that strategies are optimal not only in the overall game but also in every subgame. Selten's formulation emphasizes sequential rationality, where players choose best responses at every information set, preventing equilibria supported only by implausible off-path behavior.
Backward induction applies to diverse scenarios, such as the centipede game, where rational anticipation leads players to terminate cooperation early despite potential for higher joint payoffs, illustrating tensions between theory and observed human behavior. It underpins analyses in economics, including oligopoly models with dynamic entry and bargaining games like the ultimatum game, where backward induction predicts that the proposer offers the smallest possible positive amount, which the responder accepts under perfect information. While powerful for theoretical prediction, empirical studies show that real-world players often deviate from backward induction due to bounded rationality, level-k thinking, or social preferencessuch as rejecting unfair offers in the ultimatum game.

Fundamentals

Definition and Process

Backward induction is a systematic reasoning technique used to solve finite sequential decision problems or games of perfect information by beginning at the terminal states and working backwards to derive optimal actions at each prior decision point. This method, formalized in the foundational work of game theory, ensures that strategies are optimal not only for the overall problem but also for every subproblem encountered along the way.
The process of backward induction proceeds in a structured, iterative manner. First, identify the terminal nodes of the decision tree or game tree, where payoffs or outcomes are fully determined and no further actions are possible. Second, at each decision node immediately preceding a terminal node, select the action that maximizes the payoff for the decision-maker at that node, assuming rationality. Third, substitute the value of this resolved subproblem (the maximum payoff) as the effective payoff for the preceding node, effectively pruning suboptimal branches. Fourth, repeat this backward traversal through all prior nodes until reaching the initial decision point, yielding the optimal strategy from the start.
This technique relies on several key prerequisites: the problem must be finite, with a limited number of stages and a clear endpoint; decision-makers must possess perfect information about the structure, possible actions, and payoffs at every stage; and all agents are assumed to be rational, maximizing their expected utility, with this rationality being common knowledge among them. These assumptions enable the method to predict equilibrium outcomes in sequential settings.
In non-game contexts, such as single-agent sequential decision problems, backward induction functions as a general algorithm akin to dynamic programming. It can be outlined in pseudocode as follows:
function backward_induction(decision_tree):
 # Base case: terminal nodes
 if node.is_terminal():
 return node.payoff
 
 # Recursive step: evaluate subproblems backward
 max_value = -infinity
 optimal_action = None
 for action in node.actions:
 sub_value = backward_induction(node.successor(action))
 if sub_value > max_value:
 max_value = sub_value
 optimal_action = action
 
 # Assign optimal value and action to current node
 node.value = max_value
 node.optimal_action = optimal_action
 return max_value

# Initiate from root
optimal_strategy = backward_induction(root_node)
This recursive formulation computes the value function and optimal policy by solving subproblems from the end, ensuring computational tractability for finite horizons.

Basic Example

To illustrate backward induction, consider a simple single-player sequential decision problem with three stages, representing a simplified chain of investments where the decision-maker can stop at any stage to secure a payoff or continue, with payoffs increasing but carrying the risk of total loss (payoff of 0) if the process extends beyond the final stage without stopping. At stage 1, stopping yields a payoff of 1; continuing leads to stage 2. At stage 2, stopping yields 3; continuing leads to stage 3. At stage 3, stopping yields 6; continuing beyond yields 0.
The backward induction process begins at the final stage and works backward to determine the optimal choice at each subgame. At stage 3, the decision-maker compares stopping (payoff 6) to continuing (payoff 0) and chooses to stop, yielding a value of 6 for reaching stage 3. Substituting this backward, at stage 2, the decision-maker compares stopping (payoff 3) to continuing (value 6 from stage 3) and chooses to continue, yielding a value of 6 for reaching stage 2. Finally, at stage 1, the decision-maker compares stopping (payoff 1) to continuing (value 6 from stage 2) and chooses to continue, yielding a value of 6 for the initial decision.
This can be visualized through a decision tree, where nodes represent stages and branches represent choices (stop or continue), with terminal payoffs labeled:

Stage 1 node: Branch to stop (payoff 1) or continue to stage 2.

Stage 2 node: Branch to stop (payoff 3) or continue to stage 3.

Stage 3 node: Branch to stop (payoff 6) or continue (payoff 0).

Backward reasoning prunes suboptimal branches, revealing the optimal path: continue at stage 1, continue at stage 2, stop at stage 3, for total payoff 6.
A key insight is that forward reasoningconsidering immediate payoffs without anticipating future optimal choicesmight suggest stopping early at stage 1 for the secure 1, potentially misleading the decision-maker; backward induction ensures subgame perfection by guaranteeing optimality in every possible continuation. This approach relates to broader optimal stopping problems in decision theory.

Applications in Decision Theory

Optimal Stopping Problems

Optimal stopping problems are a class of decision problems in which an agent observes a sequence of random variablessuch as offers or signalsand must decide at each step whether to stop and accept the current observation or continue to the next, with the goal of maximizing the expected reward. These problems are solved using backward induction for finite horizons, where the optimal strategy is computed by recursively evaluating decisions from the final period backward to the initial one, determining reservation values that threshold acceptance at each stage.
The theoretical foundations of optimal stopping emerged in the mid-20th century within decision theory, with strong connections to dynamic programming as developed by Richard Bellman in the 1950s; Bellman's framework formalized the recursive structure of sequential decisions, enabling the analysis of stopping rules as special cases of multistage optimization.
Mathematically, consider a finite-horizon optimal stopping problem over $ n $ periods, where offers $ X_1, X_2, \dots, X_n $ are drawn independently from a known distribution, and recall of previous offers is not allowed. The value function $ V_k $ at stage $ k $ (with $ k = n $ at the last stage and decreasing to 1) is defined recursively as
Vn=Xn,
V_n = X_n,
Vn=Xn,
and for $ k = 1, \dots, n-1 $,
Vk=max(Xk,E),
V_k = \max(X_k, \mathbb{E}),
Vk=max(Xk,E),
where the expectation is taken over the distribution of future offers. The optimal policy is to accept the offer at stage $ k $ if $ X_k \geq \mathbb{E} $, which defines a reservation value $ \xi_k = \mathbb{E} $; otherwise, continue to the next stage. This backward recursion yields decreasing reservation values as earlier stages approach, reflecting the value of remaining opportunities.
A classic illustration is the house-selling problem, a value-based variant of optimal stopping where a seller receives sequential offers for a house and seeks to maximize the expected sale price. Assume offers arrive daily for $ n $ days from a known distribution (e.g., uniform on ), with no recall permitted. Backward induction computes the reservation price $ \xi_k $ at day $ k $ (counting backward from the end) as $ \xi_k = \mathbb{E} $, starting with $ \xi_n = 0 $ (accept any final offer or get 0 if none). For example, with $ n=3 $ and uniform offers on , the computations yield $ \xi_3 = 0 $, $ \xi_2 = 1/2 $, and $ \xi_1 = 5/8 = 0.625 $, so the seller accepts on day 1 only if the offer exceeds 0.625, on day 2 if above 0.5, and always on day 3. This strategy achieves an expected payoff higher than always accepting the first offer or random stopping, highlighting backward induction's role in balancing immediate gain against future potential.
Another seminal example is the secretary problem, originally posed in the late 1950s and solved in the early 1960s, where an employer interviews $ n $ candidates sequentially in random order and must hire the best one by deciding irrevocably at each interview. Backward induction for the finite case computes the probability of selecting the best candidate by determining stopping thresholds based on relative ranks observed so far, though the infinite-horizon approximation famously suggests rejecting the first $ n/e $ candidates (about 37%) and then accepting the next record-best. The problem's solution, yielding a success probability approaching $ 1/e \approx 0.368 $, was first derived by D. V. Lindley in 1961, building on earlier formulations.

Economic Entry Decisions

In economic models of market entry, a potential entrant must decide whether to incur a fixed entry cost and compete in a market dominated by an incumbent firm, while anticipating the incumbent's response to entry, such as accommodating the new competitor or aggressively fighting through increased output or pricing to reduce the entrant's profitability. This sequential decision structure creates a strategic interaction where the entrant's choice depends on the expected post-entry behavior of the incumbent.
Backward induction is applied by first solving the post-entry subgame, in which the incumbent selects its output or pricing strategy to maximize its own profit given the entrant's presence, often minimizing the entrant's profit in the process. The entrant then evaluates this anticipated post-entry equilibrium payoff against the fixed entry cost; if the net payoff is negative, entry is deterred. This process ensures that only credible incumbent strategiesthose optimal in every subgameinfluence the entrant's decision, leading to a subgame perfect equilibrium.
A simple entry game illustrates this: the entrant chooses to stay out (payoff: 0 for entrant, 10 for incumbent) or enter (paying fixed cost F upon entry); upon entry, the incumbent chooses to accommodate (payoffs: 5 for entrant net of F, 5 for incumbent) or fight (payoffs: -1 - F for entrant, -1 for incumbent). Using backward induction, the incumbent's dominant strategy in the post-entry subgame is to accommodate, as 5 > -1, yielding an expected entrant payoff of 5 - F. If F > 5, the entrant stays out, achieving the equilibrium (stay out, accommodate if entered); however, this reveals that empty threats of fighting lack credibility without commitment mechanisms.
The entrant's net payoff in such models is given by:
e=F+(qe,qi(qe))
\pi_e = -F + \pi(q_e, q_i(q_e))
e=F+(qe,qi(qe))
where FFF is the fixed entry cost, ()\pi(\cdot)() is the entrant's variable profit, qeq_eqe is the entrant's output, and qi(qe)q_i(q_e)qi(qe) is the incumbent's best-response output, derived backward from the post-entry Cournot or pricing subgame.
These models explain predatory pricing or limit pricing as rational, commitment-based strategies: an incumbent may pre-commit to high capacity investment, shifting its post-entry reaction curve to credibly deter entry by making the entrant's (qe,qi(qe))\pi(q_e, q_i(q_e))(qe,qi(qe)) unprofitable. Dixit (1980) extends this framework by incorporating sunk capacity costs, showing that an incumbent can strategically overinvest in capacity to alter its marginal cost curve, enabling limit output levels that block entry while maximizing long-term profits, as in blockaded monopoly outcomes when fixed costs are high. This highlights how irreversible investments serve as credible threats, distinguishing them from reversible actions that fail under backward induction.

Applications in Game Theory

Multi-Stage Games

In multi-stage games with perfect information, players alternate moves in a finite sequence, represented as an extensive-form game tree where each node denotes a decision point and branches indicate possible actions leading to terminal payoffs. Backward induction serves as the primary method to solve these games, determining optimal strategies by reasoning from the end of the tree backward to the initial node, thereby identifying the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE). This equilibrium refines the standard Nash equilibrium by ensuring that strategies form a Nash equilibrium not only in the full game but also in every subgamea portion of the tree beginning at any node and including all subsequent branches.
The process of backward induction begins at the terminal nodes (leaves) of the game tree, where payoffs are known, and proceeds upward by selecting the action that maximizes the payoff for the player at each decision node, assuming rational play thereafter. This backward solving eliminates non-credible threats or promises, as strategies off the equilibrium path must remain optimal in the subgames they define. For instance, in a simple two-player sequential game where Player 1 chooses between actions leading to a subgame where Player 2 responds, backward induction first resolves Player 2's best response in that subgame before determining Player 1's initial choice. The resulting strategy profile survives iterated deletion of dominated strategies across all subgames, ensuring sequential rationality.
A prominent example is the centipede game, a finite multi-stage game introduced by Rosenthal in 1981, where two players alternate decisions to either "take" a growing pot (terminating the game with an advantageous payoff for the taker) or "pass" to increase the pot further, potentially benefiting both if continued. Despite incentives for cooperation through passing to reach higher joint payoffs, backward induction predicts immediate termination by the first player taking the pot, as rational anticipation of the opponent's defection at later stages unravels the game from the end. This outcome highlights the tension between theoretical prediction and intuitive cooperation in sequential settings.
The connection to SPNE traces back to Zermelo's theorem, which established that in finite, perfect-information games like chessmodeled as alternating-move treesone player can force a win, a draw, or the opponent a win; optimal strategies in such games can be determined via backward induction, formalizing them as those surviving deletion of inferior moves in subgames (though Zermelo's original proof used non-repetition). Selten later generalized this for broader extensive-form games, defining SPNE as a strategy profile where no player regrets any deviation in any subgame, applicable under assumptions of common knowledge of payoffs, perfect information (no simultaneous moves), and finite stages to avoid infinite regress. These conditions ensure the uniqueness or determinacy of outcomes in deterministic trees, as in Zermelo's analysis.

Ultimatum Game Analysis

The ultimatum game is a two-player, one-shot bargaining experiment where one player, the proposer, offers to split a fixed sum of money, denoted as XXX, with the other player, the responder. The proposer suggests an amount sss (where 0sX0 \leq s \leq X0sX) for the responder, retaining XsX - sXs for themselves; the responder then decides to accept, receiving sss while the proposer gets XsX - sXs, or reject, resulting in both players receiving nothing. This setup models a simple sequential decision process, often analyzed under perfect rationality assumptions.
Applying backward induction to the ultimatum game begins at the responder's decision node, the final subgame. In this subgame, for any offer s>0s > 0s>0, the responder's rational choice is to accept, as sss exceeds the alternative payoff of 0; for s=0s = 0s=0, indifference holds, but acceptance is weakly dominant. Anticipating this, the proposer, at the initial node, selects the minimal positive offer >0\epsilon > 0>0 (approaching 0 in continuous terms), retaining nearly all of XXX. The game's extensive form can be represented as a decision tree:

Proposer chooses ss \in s.

If s>0s > 0s>0, Responder accepts: payoffs (XsX - sXs, sss).

If s>0s > 0s>0, Responder rejects: payoffs (0, 0).

If s=0s = 0s=0, Responder accepts or rejects: payoffs (XXX, 0) or (0, 0).

This yields a subgame perfect equilibrium where the proposer offers \epsilon and the responder accepts any ss \geq \epsilons.
In contrast, experimental implementations deviate substantially from this prediction. The original study by Gth et al. (1982) found proposers offering an average of 35-40% of the stake, with responders rejecting offers below 20-30% approximately 20% of the time. A meta-analysis of 37 papers encompassing 75 ultimatum game experiments confirmed these patterns, showing average proposer offers of 40% of XXX and rejection rates of 16% for low offers, with fair splits (around 50/50) common across cultures.
These findings underscore the tension between backward induction's rational benchmark and human behavior in anonymous, one-shot interactions, where fairness norms and aversion to inequity drive proposers toward equitable divisions and responders toward punishing unfairness, even at personal cost.

Limitations and Paradoxes

Unexpected Hanging Paradox

The unexpected hanging paradox, also known as the surprise examination paradox, illustrates a self-referential logical puzzle that undermines backward induction when applied to predictions involving knowledge and surprise. In its standard setup, a judge informs a condemned prisoner that the execution will take place at noon on one weekday of the following weektypically Monday through Fridayand that it will occur on a day the prisoner cannot anticipate in advance. The prisoner reasons iteratively: the hanging cannot be on Friday, the final day, because if it has not occurred by Thursday noon, the prisoner would deduce and thus expect it, violating the surprise condition. With Friday eliminated, Thursday becomes the effective last day and is similarly ruled out, as the prisoner would then expect it; this backward elimination continues through Wednesday, Tuesday, and Monday, leading the prisoner to conclude that no execution is possible under the judge's truthful announcement. However, the prisoner is then hanged unexpectedly, for example on Tuesday, satisfying the conditions and exposing the flawed reasoning.
This process directly parallels backward induction, where outcomes are determined by starting from terminal states and working reversely through decision points, but here it generates a contradiction because the self-referential prediction about the prisoner's own knowledge disrupts the chain. The paradox emerges from the announcement's dependence on the prisoner's epistemic state, creating a loop where the prediction of surprise precludes its own fulfillment across all days.
Philosophically, the puzzle probes the interplay of surprise, knowledge, and common knowledge in predictive logic, revealing tensions in assuming perfect rationality and information. Resolutions often attribute the error to the announcement's self-refuting quality: W.V. Quine contended that the initial elimination of the last day fails because it presupposes the statement's unconditional truth, ignoring how the prisoner's deduction alters the epistemic landscape. Other approaches invoke non-monotonic logic, where beliefs can be revised upon new information without preserving all prior inferences, or highlight the induction's collapse in finite self-referential scenarios, mimicking infinite regresses that prevent complete elimination. The paradox also links to epistemic logic dilemmas, such as Fitch's paradox of knowability, which similarly challenges the formalization of universal truth-knowability through self-reference.
The paradox gained prominence in the 1940s through oral circulation in logic circles, with possible origins in a 19431944 Swedish civil-defense puzzle, before broader exposure via academic discussions and Martin Gardner's 1963 Scientific American column.

Common Knowledge of Rationality

Common knowledge of rationality refers to an epistemic condition in strategic interactions where all players are rational, everyone knows that all players are rational, everyone knows that everyone knows this, and so on ad infinitum; this infinite hierarchy also extends to the common knowledge of the game's structure and payoffs. This concept, formalized by Robert Aumann, underpins the logical foundations of solution concepts in game theory by ensuring that players' beliefs about others' actions align perfectly with rational expectations across all levels of mutual awareness.
In backward induction, common knowledge of rationality plays a crucial role by guaranteeing that players disregard non-credible threats or promises, as rational behavior in subgames is anticipated with certainty due to the shared infinite regress of knowledge. For instance, in Reinhard Selten's chain-store paradox, an incumbent firm faces sequential entry decisions by potential competitors over a finite number of periods; backward induction, supported by common knowledge of rationality, implies the incumbent always accommodates entrants rather than fighting, as aggressive responses become non-credible in later periods and unravel backward, undermining any reputation-based deterrence. Without this epistemic assumption, players might sustain cooperation through beliefs in irrationality, but common knowledge enforces the induction outcome by eliminating off-path behaviors as unreachable.
A representative example is the finitely repeated prisoner's dilemma, where players face a sequence of simultaneous-move dilemmas; under common knowledge of rationality, backward induction unravels potential cooperation, leading both players to defect in every period, as the last-period Nash equilibrium (mutual defection) is anticipated and propagates backward. Cristina Bicchieri's analysis highlights how this epistemic condition resolves paradoxes in such games by clarifying that deviations from induction require uncertainty about others' rationality, which common knowledge precludes.
Aumann's 1976 framework provides the formal foundation, modeling common knowledge through partitions in a state space where rationality is a property of states, implying that in games of perfect information, common knowledge of rationality yields the backward induction solution as the unique rationalizable outcome. This extends to broader implications, such as iterative elimination of non-rationalizable strategies converging to the induction path, linking common knowledge to refinements like rationalizability in multi-stage games.
Establishing common knowledge of rationality proves challenging in practice, particularly in long finite games, where the infinite hierarchy of mutual knowledge becomes cognitively burdensome, often resulting in "induction failure" as players deviate from predicted paths due to incomplete epistemic alignment. In extended sequential settings, this difficulty amplifies, as sustaining the regress over numerous stages strains assumptions of perfect mutual foresight, leading to observed breakdowns in induction despite theoretical predictions.

Bounded Rationality Constraints

Bounded rationality, introduced by Herbert Simon in the 1950s, posits that decision-makers operate under constraints of limited computational capacity, incomplete information, and finite foresight, leading them to pursue satisficing behaviors rather than exhaustive optimization. In the context of backward induction, these limitations undermine the assumption of perfect rationality, as agents cannot feasibly compute or anticipate outcomes across extended decision horizons, resulting in approximations of inductive reasoning rather than full unraveling.
Level-k thinking models formalize these constraints by assuming players engage in bounded levels of induction, where a level-k player best-responds to beliefs about others' level-(k-1) reasoning, often truncating at shallow depths due to cognitive limits. Rosenthal's centipede game exemplifies this: while backward induction predicts immediate defection to avoid unraveling, experimental observations show players terminating play earlyreflecting bounded foresight that prevents full anticipation of distant subgame equilibriarather than adhering to the predicted path.
Theoretical frameworks like Levinthal's 1997 model of adaptation on rugged landscapes highlight how bounded computation restricts exhaustive search in strategic interactions, mirroring game-theoretic settings where agents navigate complex payoff structures without infinite processing power. Behavioral economics provides supporting evidence, with studies demonstrating that such limits lead to deviations from backward induction predictions in multi-stage scenarios.
These constraints have key implications for finitely repeated games, where bounded rationality sustains cooperation by preventing the complete backward induction unraveling that would otherwise enforce defection throughout.

Advanced Extensions

Subgame Perfect Equilibrium

Subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE), also referred to as subgame perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE), is a refinement of the Nash equilibrium concept for extensive-form games, requiring that the strategy profile constitutes a Nash equilibrium in every subgame of the original game. This solution concept was introduced by Reinhard Selten in 1965 as a way to ensure sequential rationality throughout the game tree, extending the logic of backward induction beyond perfect information settings.
In games with perfect information, SPE aligns directly with the outcomes of backward induction applied to multi-stage structures. However, in imperfect information environments, such as signaling games, computing SPE involves backward induction starting from terminal nodes, where players' actions are evaluated based on sequential rationality given their beliefs about unobserved types or histories. Beliefs at information sets are updated using Bayes' rule whenever possible, ensuring that strategies are optimal conditional on all available information at each decision point.
A classic illustration is the beer-quiche signaling game analyzed by In-Koo Cho and David M. Kreps in 1987, where a sender of unknown type (strong or weak) chooses between drinking beer or quiche in the morning, observed by a receiver who then decides whether to challenge the sender to a fight later that day. The strong type prefers beer for breakfast and gets payoffs of 3 (beer + fight), 2 (quiche + fight), 2 (beer + no fight), 1 (quiche + no fight), while the weak type prefers quiche and avoiding a fight, getting 0 (beer + fight), 1 (quiche + fight), 1 (beer + no fight), 2 (quiche + no fight). Applying backward induction, the receiver's optimal response depends on beliefs about the sender's type after observing the breakfast choice. In a pooling equilibrium where both types choose quiche, off-equilibrium beliefs (e.g., if beer is observed) can be set such that the receiver believes the sender is strong and challenges, deterring deviation by the weak type but allowing the strong type to potentially separate by choosing beer if beliefs support it. Separating equilibria emerge where the strong type chooses beer (signaling strength, leading to challenge) and the weak chooses quiche (pooling avoidance), verified by backward induction ensuring no profitable deviations at each information set given Bayesian-updated beliefs.
For computation in more complex cases, trembling-hand perfection serves as a refinement of SPE, requiring that the equilibrium is the limit of Nash equilibria in perturbed games where players make small mistakes (trembles) with positive probability. Selten developed this concept in 1975 to address non-uniqueness in SPE, particularly in games with implausible off-equilibrium behaviors.
The key advantage of SPE over standard backward induction in perfect information games is its ability to handle hidden information, where pure induction alone may fail without specifying beliefs at non-singleton information sets, ensuring credibility across all subgames.

Experimental Evidence

Laboratory experiments on backward induction have been conducted since the 1980s, primarily using games like the ultimatum game and centipede game, where predictions of full unraveling to the subgame perfect equilibrium are frequently rejected in favor of more cooperative or non-equilibrium play. A comprehensive survey by Camerer (2003) analyzes over 100 experimental studies across various strategic interactions, revealing consistent patterns of partial unraveling in finite-horizon games, where players exhibit limited foresight beyond a few steps rather than complete backward induction.
Key empirical investigations include McKelvey and Palfrey's (1992) experiments with the centipede game, a canonical test of backward induction in finite perfect-information games, which demonstrate that while initial play deviates substantially from the induction prediction, repeated interactions lead to gradual convergence toward the subgame perfect outcome as subjects gain experience. Similarly, level-k models developed by Nagel (1995) and Stahl and Wilson (1995) provide a better fit to observed behavior in guessing and p-beauty contest games than full rationality assumptions, positing that players reason iteratively to bounded depths (typically k=1 or 2), explaining failures of complete induction without invoking irrationality.
Several factors influence adherence to backward induction in experiments, including stake sizes, where higher incentives promote deeper reasoning and closer alignment with predictions; repetition, which fosters learning and partial unraveling; and clarity of instructions, which reduces confusion about the game's structure. Field evidence from real-world settings, such as auctions and bargaining, further highlights deviations; for instance, analysis of over 40 years of data from the TV game show "The Price Is Right" reveals persistent failures of backward induction even in high-stakes environments, with contestants often ignoring later-stage incentives.
Post-2010 developments incorporate neuroeconomic methods, such as fMRI studies showing distinct brain activations for shallow versus deep reasoning in sequential games; Coricelli and Nagel (2012) found increased prefrontal cortex activity associated with abstract backward induction learning, but persistent reliance on experiential heuristics for limited depths. Recent learning models integrate Bayesian updates to capture how players revise beliefs about opponents' rationality over time, better explaining gradual convergence in repeated games than static induction. In computational economics, 2020s simulations using AI agents, such as reinforcement learning in multi-agent environments, test induction robustness and reveal that even advanced algorithms deviate under noise or incomplete information, informing behavioral insights beyond lab settings.

References

 Chapter 9 Backward Induction - MIT OpenCourseWare

 Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilibrium Points in ...

https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/centipede-game.asp

Experience and Abstract Reasoning in Learning Backward Induction

Game Theory - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

 Dynamic Programming - Lecture Notes 10 - Stanford University

 PhD Macroeconomics 1 10. Finite-Horizon Deterministic Dynamic ...

 Optimal Stopping and Applications - UCLA Mathematics

 Optimal Stopping Rules - UCSB Computer Science

 THE THEORY OF DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING - Richard Bellman

 Who Solved the Secretary Problem? - Penn Math

 Notes on Strategic Entry Deterrence - Meet the Berkeley-Haas Faculty

 Econ 353 Final Project - LAITS

The Role of Investment in Entry-Deterrence - jstor

 Chapter 11 Subgame-Perfect Nash Equilibrium

 Reinhard Selten - Prize Lecture

 Zermelo and the Early History of Game Theory

An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining - ScienceDirect.com

 Ultimatum Games

Cultural Differences in Ultimatum Game Experiments: Evidence from ...

 The Paradox of the Unexpected Hanging

 Knowledge-of-own-factivity, the definition of surprise, and a solution ...

Backward induction and common knowledge of rationality

The chain store paradox | Theory and Decision

Common Belief of Rationality in the Finitely Repeated Prisoners ...

(PDF) Backward induction and common knowledge of rationality

 The Backward Induction Paradox - Philip Pettit; Robert Sugden

Bounded Rationality - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Bounded Rationality in the Centipede Game1 | Episteme

Adaptation on Rugged Landscapes | Management Science

Bounded complexity justifies cooperation in the finitely repeated ...

 Microeconomics II Lecture 2: Backward induction and subgame ...

Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria - jstor

https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/002205307X308470

An Experimental Study of the Centipede Game - jstor

https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/0002828053828454

https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.97.5.1911

High-stakes failures of backward induction - ScienceDirect

How do individuals interact with an AI advisor in strategic reasoning ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion