Bank switching Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Bank switching
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Bank switching is a memory management technique employed in computer architectures, particularly in 8-bit microcontrollers and early personal computers, to expand the effective size of code and data memory beyond the processor's native addressable limit without requiring an increase in the width of the address bus. This method partitions the total memory into multiple discrete banks, each typically of equal size (e.g., 64 KB in systems like the Motorola 68HC11), with only one bank active and accessible to the CPU at any given time. The active bank is selected through dedicated hardware mechanisms, such as bank selection instructions or control registers that concatenate a bank identifier with the processor's virtual address to form the physical address, effectively treating bank switching as a simplified form of memory mapping without full page descriptors.
Originating in the mid-1960s with early minicomputers, alongside more advanced memory mapping techniques such as virtual memory, bank switching became particularly prevalent in the 1970s and 1980s for resource-constrained embedded systems and personal computers limited to 16-bit address spaces (e.g., 64 KB total). In practice, it enabled memory expansion in devices like the Zilog Z80, Intel 8051, and PIC16F877A microcontrollers, where switching between banks (e.g., four 128-byte data banks in the PIC16F877A) is triggered by explicit instructions, incurring overhead in code size and execution cycles due to the need to manage bank selections before accessing variables or code in non-active banks. For instance, in S-100 bus systems popular in the late 1970s, bank switching allowed expansion to 1 MB or more by selecting among multiple 64 KB banks via DIP switches, I/O ports, or software controls, supporting applications in early personal computing like the Apple II and TRS-80.
The primary advantages of bank switching include reduced hardware complexity and cost, as it avoids the need for wider address buses or more complex mapping hardware, while also potentially lowering power consumption and increasing clock speeds in embedded designs. However, it introduces challenges such as bank conflictswhere frequent switches serialize operations and degrade performanceand limitations on program size, as no single program can span multiple banks without explicit management, making data exchange between banks cumbersome. Compiler optimizations, such as those using partitioned Boolean quadratic programming to minimize selection instructions, have been developed to mitigate these issues, yielding reductions in memory usage (2.7%18.2%) and cycles (5.1%28.8%) in benchmarks for microcontrollers like the PIC16F877A. Although largely superseded in modern 32- and 64-bit architectures by virtual memory and larger address spaces, bank switching remains relevant in low-cost, memory-constrained IoT and embedded systems, for example, in RISC-V processors and low-end microcontrollers as of 2024.

Fundamentals

Definition and Purpose

Bank switching is a hardware-based memory management technique that enables a computer system to access more memory than its processor's native address bus can directly support. It achieves this by partitioning the total physical memory into fixed-size units known as "banks," typically matching the size of the processor's address space, such as 64 KB segments for 16-bit addressing systems. These banks are selectively mapped into the processor's visible address space through hardware controls, allowing only one or a subset to be active at a time while others remain dormant.
The primary purpose of bank switching is to circumvent the inherent limitations of processors with constrained address buses, such as those limited to 64 KB of directly addressable memory, thereby permitting the installation and utilization of larger total memory capacities without necessitating a complete redesign of the processor architecture. This approach was particularly valuable in resource-constrained environments where expanding the address bus width would increase hardware complexity and cost. Key benefits include its relative simplicity in implementation, relying on basic hardware elements like latches or registers for bank selection, and minimal runtime overhead, making it ideal for static memory applications such as program code storage in read-only memory (ROM).
Bank switching emerged in the 1960s amid the rapid decline in memory costs, which outpaced advancements in processor addressing capabilities, creating a demand for techniques to scale memory economically in early minicomputer systems. For instance, by the 1970s and 1980s, 8-bit processors, commonly limited to 64 KB addressing, increasingly required bank switching to accommodate ROM or EPROM cartridges exceeding this limit in consumer devices like video game consoles.
Unlike virtual memory, which involves operating system-mediated abstraction, protection, and swapping between RAM and secondary storage like disks, bank switching operates at the hardware level without OS intervention or disk involvement, focusing solely on expanding direct physical memory access through explicit program-controlled switching.

Basic Mechanism

Bank switching enables a processor with a limited address space to access larger amounts of physical memory by selectively mapping different memory banks into the visible address range. The core process involves the processor writing a bank identifier to a dedicated bank select register, often via an I/O port instruction or memory-mapped I/O. This write operation latches the bank number into the register, after which a hardware decoder interprets the value to assert chip select signals for the target memory bank while deasserting them for others, thereby routing the processor's address and data signals exclusively to the active bank.
At the hardware level, the mechanism relies on address decoding logic to interpret the processor's address bus, combined with latchessuch as the 74LS373 octal D-type transparent latchto stably hold the bank select value until the next switch. Multiplexers then remap the high-order address bits by substituting bits from the bank register in place of unused upper address lines from the processor, effectively extending the addressable space. For instance, in a basic circuit for switching between two 64 KB banks using a single control bit, the processor's 16-bit address bus connects directly to the lower 16 bits of each bank's address inputs, while the latched select bit drives a decoder (e.g., a 74LS138 3-to-8 line decoder configured for binary selection) to enable one bank's chip select and a multiplexer (e.g., 74LS157 quad 2-to-1) to prepend the select bit as the 17th address line for the physical memory array.
Software plays an active role by explicitly managing bank switches through dedicated routines, typically implemented as inline assembly or function calls that perform port writes or interrupt-driven handlers to load content from inactive banks into the active space; unlike virtual memory systems, no hardware-managed automatic translation occurs, requiring programmers to track bank states manually.
Address space mapping in bank switching generally affects only the upper bits of the address bus, leaving lower bits unchanged for direct access within the bank. For example, a 16-bit processor address bus paired with a 2-bit bank select register supports 256 KB of total memory organized into four 64 KB banks, where the two highest bits are replaced by the latched bank value during decoding. Bank sizes remain fixed per system design, often 16 KB or 64 KB, to align with common dynamic RAM (DRAM) chip capacities and simplify decoding logic.
A representative software routine for initiating a bank switch might appear in pseudocode as follows:
procedure SwitchBank(bank_id: integer);
begin
 OUT(0xFF, bank_id); // Write the bank number to I/O port 0xFF, latching it into the select register
end;
This simple operation, such as SwitchBank(3); to activate bank 3, immediately remaps the address space without further overhead, allowing seamless continuation of program execution in the new bank.
In contrast to software overlays, which manage memory by dynamically loading and unloading program modules from secondary storage under explicit program control to fit within physical limits, bank switching provides hardware-mediated swapping of pre-loaded RAM blocks, avoiding disk access delays and supporting rapid context shifts for resident code and data.

Historical Applications

Early Minicomputers

Bank switching first appeared in the Control Data Corporation (CDC) 160 series of minicomputers, introduced in 1960 and designed by Seymour Cray. Initially developed as a peripheral input/output controller for the CDC 1604 mainframe, the standalone CDC 160 provided 4,096 words of 12-bit magnetic core memory, but its architecture limited direct addressing to this amount. The subsequent CDC 160-A model, released shortly after, incorporated a dedicated bank-switch instruction to enable selection among multiple memory banks, extending the effective addressable space up to 32,000 words while using the same 12-bit addressing scheme.
A prominent example of bank switching's application in larger-scale minicomputers was the CDC 6600 supercomputer, unveiled in 1964. This system organized its central memory into 32 independent banks of 4,096 60-bit words each, supporting configurations up to 131,072 words in standard mode. For scientific computing workloads requiring greater capacity, the Extended Core Storage (ECS) option employed bank switching across up to four bays of phased banks, achieving a total of 2 million wordsequivalent to approximately 15 MB of storage (using 60-bit words)through address decoding that selected specific banks via controller logic.
In these early implementations, bank switching operated by altering memory addressing through processor control words or dedicated instructions; for instance, in the CDC 160-A, an opcode extension triggered the switch between banks of 4,096 words, remapping the address space without hardware reconfiguration. Similarly, the CDC 6600's mode registers and peripheral processors managed bank selection, ensuring seamless transitions for batch-processing tasks while maintaining compatibility with core memory cycle times of around 1 microsecond.
This technique facilitated cost-effective memory expansion in batch-processing environments, where minicomputers handled scientific simulations and data analysis for multiple users, demonstrating reliability under sustained loads. Its success in systems like the CDC 6600 influenced subsequent minicomputer architectures by validating bank switching as a practical method for scaling memory without redesigning the core processor.
By 1965, bank switching had become a standard feature in minicomputers, coinciding with magnetic core memory prices falling below $1 per bit due to manufacturing improvements and economies of scale.

8-Bit Microcomputers

In the 1970s and 1980s, home and hobbyist microcomputers based on 8-bit processors like the Zilog Z80 and MOS 6502 were constrained by their 16-bit address buses, which permitted direct access to only 64 KB of memory. This limitation proved particularly restrictive for software distribution, as ROM capacities for games and operating systems quickly exceeded 64 KB. Bank switching addressed this by allowing multiple memory banks to be mapped into the processor's address space, effectively expanding usable ROM without altering the core CPU architecture. This technique became essential for affordable personal systems, shifting from the bulkier core memory of earlier minicomputers to semiconductor-based expansions that enabled larger, more complex programs.
Early adoption appeared in systems like the Cromemco System Three, introduced in 1977, which utilized the S-100 bus to support up to 16 banks of 64 KB RAM, facilitating multitasking and multi-user environments through selective bank mapping. The Apple II series exemplified software-controlled switching via "soft switches," where language cards expanded memory to 128 KB by toggling between two 64 KB RAM banks in the D000D000D000FFFF range, activated by writes to addresses like $C080 for bank selection and $C011 for reading the current state. Implementations varied: fixed banking for ROM often relied on hardware address line decoding to segment static code areas, while dynamic banking for RAM used I/O ports or registers for on-the-fly selection. For instance, the Commodore 64 employed 16 KB banks for VIC-II video memory access, controlled by the second CIA chip's data direction register at $DD02 and port A at $DD00, where bits 01 output bank select signals to configure one of four RAM banks visible to the VIC.
Software techniques for managing bank switches typically involved dedicated headers in fixed memory banks containing jump tables, which facilitated seamless transitions to subroutines in other banks via an OUT instruction to a control port followed by a CALL. This allowed programs to execute across expanded spaces while maintaining compatibility with the 64 KB view. However, interrupts posed significant challenges, as they could trigger mid-switch, leading to bank conflicts where code or data from the wrong bank was accessed; developers mitigated this by saving and restoring bank states on the stack before interrupt handlers, ensuring atomic switches to prevent corruption.
By 1982, bank switching had become standard in most 8-bit microcomputers, exemplified by the ZX Spectrum, which supported cartridge expansions up to 512 KB through paging mechanisms that mapped 16 KB ROM banks into the address space via I/O port writes. This widespread integration democratized access to larger software libraries, fueling the home computing boom with ROM-based games and utilities that far exceeded the native address limits.

IBM PC Implementation

The IBM PC, introduced in 1981, utilized the Intel 8088 microprocessor with a 20-bit address bus capable of addressing up to 1 MB of physical memory in total. Of this, only 640 KB was designated as conventional memory available to MS-DOS applications, with the remaining 384 KB reserved for system ROM, video buffers, and expansion card memory mappings.
This limitation prompted the development of the Expanded Memory Specification (EMS) by Lotus, Intel, and Microsoft (collectively LIM), with the initial version 3.0 released in 1985 and version 3.2 standardized in 1986 to support up to 8 MB of expanded memory. EMS implemented bank switching by dividing expanded memory into 16 KB logical pages, which could be mapped into a contiguous 64 KB page frame within the upper memory area (typically between 640 KB and 1 MB, such as at addresses D0000hDFFFFh). In the subsequent LIM EMS 4.0 specification from October 1987, an expanded memory manager (EMM) used four page registers to control these mappings, allowing up to 32 MB total expanded memory while emulating 16 KB pages if hardware provided smaller units. Switching occurred through software calls that updated the page registers, enabling dynamic access to non-conventional memory without altering the base 1 MB address space.
Hardware support for EMS required add-on expansion cards, such as Intel's Above Board introduced in 1984, which provided the additional DRAM banks and bank select registers integrated with the ISA bus. Programs accessed EMS via an EMM device driver loaded at boot time, using BIOS interrupt 67h for operations like mapping pages (function 50h in AH) to set the visible frame content. For example, terminate-and-stay-resident (TSR) programs could be relocated to expanded memory using utilities from memory managers like Quarterdeck's QEMM, such as its LOADHI command, to maximize conventional memory availability.
By the early 1990s, EMS hardware had become obsolete as 32-bit operating systems and extended memory standards like XMS superseded it, though software emulation via drivers such as EMM386 persisted in MS-DOS and early Windows versions for legacy compatibility. Modern Windows environments continue to support EMS emulation through virtual DOS machines for running older applications.

Consumer Electronics Applications

Video Game Consoles

Bank switching played a crucial role in early video game consoles from the 1970s to the 1990s, enabling developers to expand ROM capacity beyond the hardware's native address space limits, typically 16 to 64 KB, to accommodate more complex game logic, levels, and graphics. In fixed-hardware systems like these, cartridge-based mapperscustom chips or logic circuitsfacilitated dynamic switching of ROM banks, allowing games to access larger program ROM (PRG-ROM) without redesigning the console's CPU address bus. This technique was essential for cost-effective production, as it permitted the use of inexpensive 8-bit processors while supporting cartridges up to several hundred kilobytes.
A seminal example is the Atari 2600, released in 1977, which featured only 4 KB of addressable ROM space. Bank switching here employed simple address line tricks to select between 4 KB banks, often triggered by writing to specific "hotspot" addresses like $1FF8 or $1FF9, which latched an extra address bit to remap the cartridge's ROM into the F000F000F000FFFF range. This allowed early games to reach 8 KB, with later schemes supporting up to 32 KB or more through multi-bank configurations, fundamentally enabling richer gameplay in titles like Pitfall! without exceeding the system's 13-bit address bus.
The Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), launched in 1983, advanced this with dedicated Memory Management Controller (MMC) chips, such as the MMC1, which supported PRG-ROM banking in 16 KB or 32 KB chunks, extending capacity to 256 KB standard and up to 512 KB in variants like SUROM or SXROM by reusing CHR lines for additional addressing. Techniques included horizontal banking, where banks switched based on CPU access patterns, and vertical banking tied to Picture Processing Unit (PPU) reads for graphics, allowing seamless transitions for scrolling effects in games like The Legend of Zelda. The Famicom Disk System add-on (1986) further innovated by loading data from double-sided 3-inch floppiesoffering up to 256 KB total capacityinto a 32 KB RAM buffer via BIOS-managed sequential transfers and software-based banking, reducing cartridge costs for titles like Super Mario Bros. 2.
However, these methods introduced challenges, including the need for mapper-specific code that complicated development and portability across cartridges, as each game had to handle bank transitions precisely to avoid glitches. Manufacturers like Konami incorporated proprietary chips, such as the VRC series, not only for advanced banking but also for anti-piracy measures, embedding unique timing checks or hardware locks that thwarted unauthorized copies. By the early 1990s, bank switching waned in 16-bit consoles like the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES, 1990), which featured a 24-bit address bus capable of directly accessing up to 8 MB of ROM, rendering cartridge mappers largely obsolete for basic expansion in favor of integrated coprocessors for enhanced features.

Video Processing

In video processing hardware of early display systems, bank switching enabled access to video RAM beyond the limitations of the CPU's addressable space, particularly for frame buffers supporting higher resolutions or color depths. For instance, achieving a 640x480 resolution in 256-color mode requires approximately 300 KB of memory, exceeding the standard 256 KB available on VGA hardware, necessitating techniques to switch between memory banks to map additional VRAM into the accessible window.
Expansions for the Amiga 500 utilized bank switching in its chip RAM to expand video memory capacity, allowing the blittera dedicated hardware accelerator for graphics operationsto efficiently handle tasks like bit-block transfers for frame buffer updates and sprite manipulation. This expansion, such as the MaxiMEGS card providing up to 2.5 MB of chip RAM via software-controlled bank switching during non-sync periods, ensured seamless integration with the video subsystem for real-time rendering. Similarly, early VGA cards introduced in 1987 supported banked modes to utilize more than 256 KB of video memory, enabling higher-resolution graphics by selectively mapping extended VRAM segments into the 64 KB access window.
Bank selection in EGA and VGA controllers was managed through dedicated registers in the sequencer and graphics controller. In the IBM EGA, introduced in 1984, the 64 KB windowed banking system relied on the Miscellaneous Output Register (port 3C2, bit 5) to toggle between low and high 64 KB pages in odd/even modes, while the Sequencer Memory Mode Register (port 3C5, index 04) enabled access to expanded memory beyond 64 KB by leveraging address bits 14 and 15. For VGA, the Sequencer Map Mask Register (port 3C5, index 02) controlled plane write enables, and the Graphics Controller Memory Map Select Register (index 06) defined the address range for banking, with switches occurring via CPU writes or during direct memory access (DMA) operations for efficient frame updates. These mechanisms allowed dynamic bank selection on a per-scanline basis in progressive modes or during DMA bursts for blitter-like transfers, minimizing latency in video pipelines.
A key technique in these systems was bank interleaving, which alternated access between odd and even memory banks to improve bandwidth, particularly in interlaced video where odd and even fields were processed separately. The EGA's Sequencer Memory Mode Register (index 03) configured odd/even addressing to interleave planes for faster sequential reads during scanline rendering, reducing contention in planar memory architectures. This approach, inherited in VGA's sequencer, enabled smoother handling of interlaced displays by mapping odd lines to one bank and even lines to another, enhancing real-time video performance without full memory chaining.
In arcade hardware, bank switching facilitated sprite and palette management for dynamic video effects. The Sega System 16, launched in 1985, employed sprite banking where ROM board bits 1 and 0 selected one of four sprite banks, allowing rapid switching of sprite data and associated palettesup to 64 16-color palettes per spritefor layered video composition in games like OutRun. This technique optimized video controller access to large sprite sets exceeding direct addressing limits, ensuring fluid on-screen animations within the system's 68000-based video pipeline.

Embedded Systems

Microcontrollers

In 8-bit and 16-bit microcontrollers constrained by less than 64 KB of flash memory, bank switching facilitates the management of larger firmware sizes by partitioning the program memory into multiple selectable banks, allowing access to extended code space without requiring more advanced hardware. This technique is particularly vital in embedded applications where cost and power efficiency limit memory capacity, enabling developers to implement complex routines while adhering to the microcontroller's addressable limits.
PIC microcontrollers, introduced by Microchip Technology in the 1980s, exemplify this approach through banked special function registers (SFRs) that control core and peripheral operations. In mid-range PIC devices, such as the PIC16F series, data memory is organized into up to four banks of 128 bytes each, with switching accomplished by toggling the RP0 bit (and RP1 for additional banks) in the STATUS register during direct addressing operations. This mechanism supports efficient access to general-purpose registers and SFRs across banks, though it requires careful management to avoid unintended switches during execution. For instance, Bank 0 typically holds commonly used SFRs, while higher banks store additional configuration registers, minimizing frequent banking in performance-critical code. In PIC, a dedicated Bank Select Register (BSR) is used for indirect addressing to select the active data bank.
The 8051 microcontroller family, originating from Intel in the late 1970s and widely adopted thereafter, employs code banking to surpass the standard 64 KB program memory limit, dividing code into banks accessible via hardware selection. Code execution often relies on the MOV DPTR instruction for indirect jumps to banked addresses, enabling dynamic routing to routines in different banks while maintaining a unified addressing model. A dedicated common area, typically the lower 32 KB, houses interrupt vectorsincluding the shared reset vector at address 0x0000ensuring seamless handling of interrupts regardless of the active bank and preventing conflicts in real-time embedded tasks. In 8051 variants, code banking is managed through external hardware or address extension registers, with compilers like Keil C51 using linkers to overlay banks.
Bank switching in these microcontrollers introduces overhead in interrupt service routines (ISRs), as developers must save and restore bank states to avoid disrupting the main program's memory context, a practice enforced through assembly directives or compiler intrinsics.
This methodology persists into the 2020s for cost-sensitive IoT devices, where 8/16-bit microcontrollers like PIC and 8051 derivatives remain prevalent due to their low power and minimal footprint. The Keil C51 compiler continues to support banked memory models, generating optimized code for up to 2 MB of banked space in 8051-based systems, facilitating deployment in resource-constrained sensors and controllers.

Modern Processors like ARM

In ARM-based embedded systems, particularly low-end microcontrollers without memory management units (MMUs), bank switching remains relevant for expanding limited addressable memory in flash and RAM. For instance, in the Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0+ profiles (ARMv6-M architecture, introduced in 2009), devices with flash exceeding 512 KB often use banking to alias memory regions, such as remapping the vector table to different flash banks at address 0x00000000 for interrupt handling.
The STM32F0 series from STMicroelectronics, based on Cortex-M0, employs dual-bank flash configurations to enable over-the-air (OTA) firmware updates without halting execution. Each bank is 3264 KB, with hardware controls switching between them via option bytes or software commands, allowing safe swapping during updates while maintaining code execution from the active bank. This approach avoids the need for external memory and supports up to 256 KB total flash in banked setups.
In higher-end but MMU-less ARM profiles like Cortex-M3/M4 (ARMv7-M, launched in 2004), some devices implement code banking for large flash (>1 MB) using base address registers or linker scripts to select banks, though automatic stacking and dual stack pointers (Main SP and Process SP) in handler mode reduce context switch overhead without register banking for memory access. Memory banking persists in cost-optimized IoT MCUs, such as NXP's LPC800 series (Cortex-M0+), where segmented flash uses banking for secure boot and updates.
As of November 2025, bank switching in ARM embedded systems supports low-power edge computing in battery-operated sensors, with examples in environmental monitoring devices using Cortex-M0+ for efficient memory expansion without full virtual memory overhead. In contrast, high-end ARM Cortex-A series in mobile SoCs rely on MMUs for virtual addressing, rendering memory banking obsolete.

Alternatives and Successors

Limitations

Bank switching, while effective for expanding memory in resource-constrained systems, suffers from significant performance overhead due to the latency involved in executing switch instructions. These operations often require writing to I/O ports, which in 8-bit microcontrollers can consume multiple CPU cycles per switch, leading to fragmented code execution and increased susceptibility to programming errors when switches occur frequently. In embedded applications, unoptimized bank selection can impose runtime overheads ranging from 5.1% to 28.8%, as demonstrated in analyses of partitioned memory architectures for devices like the PIC16F877A.
The technique demands manual management by programmers, who must explicitly insert bank selection instructions throughout the code, complicating development and introducing error-prone scenarios. This is particularly challenging in multitasking or interrupt-driven environments, where an interrupt may execute in the wrong bank if not properly synchronized, resulting in data corruption or system instability; for instance, subroutine calls and interrupts require explicit bank awareness, escalating complexity beyond 64 KB of code. Such manual oversight lacks the automated handling found in modern memory management, amplifying bugs in larger programs.
Scalability becomes inefficient beyond approximately 1 MB of memory, as the proliferation of banks grows exponentially with address space demands, necessitating intricate switching logic without inherent support for memory protection, virtual addressing, or inter-process sharing essential for operating system environments. In fixed-address architectures like those in 8-bit microcontrollers, expanding to larger memory sizes exacerbates code bloat and power draw from repeated switches, limiting practical use in evolving computing paradigms.
Hardware implementation adds costs through dedicated decoder logic, which incorporates additional gates for bank selection and address multiplexing, increasing overall chip area and power inefficiencyparticularly under frequent switching regimes that elevate dynamic consumption. A notable example is the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), where mapper chip implementations for bank switching occasionally led to glitches, such as flickering graphics in titles like Mega Man 3, stemming from timing-sensitive bank conflicts during rendering. By the 1990s, the advent of 32-bit processors with native support for up to 4 GB of addressable memory rendered bank switching obsolete for desktop computing, as direct addressing eliminated the need for such workarounds.

Advanced Memory Management Techniques

Segmentation represents a foundational advancement in memory management that superseded bank switching by dividing the address space into variable-sized segments, each defined by descriptors containing base addresses, limits, and access rights. Introduced in the Intel 80286 microprocessor in 1982, protected mode segmentation allows for a 1 GB virtual address space per task, mapped to up to 16 MB of physical memory, while incorporating protection mechanisms such as privilege levels (0-3) to isolate tasks and prevent unauthorized access. Descriptors, stored in tables like the Global Descriptor Table (GDT) for shared segments or Local Descriptor Table (LDT) for task-specific ones, enable flexible addressing where a 16-bit segment selector and offset form a 32-bit virtual address, translated via hardware to physical addresses with boundary and type checks. This approach addressed the fixed-bank limitations of earlier systems by supporting dynamic segment sizing from 1 byte to 64 KB, enhancing multitasking support without manual switching overhead.
Paging further evolved memory management by organizing memory into fixed-size pages, typically 4 KB, mapped through page tables managed by the Memory Management Unit (MMU). The Intel 80386, released in 1985, introduced paging in its protected mode, enabling a 4 GB linear address space with virtual-to-physical translation via multi-level page directories and tables, supporting demand paging where pages are swapped to disk as needed. Each page table entry (PTE) includes physical frame numbers, protection bits (e.g., read/write, user/kernel), and validity flags, allowing non-contiguous allocation and efficient sharing of physical memory among processes. This mechanism provides isolation and relocation transparency, mitigating fragmentation issues inherent in segmentation alone, and forms the basis for modern virtual memory systems.
Hybrid approaches combine segmentation and paging to leverage their strengths, as seen in modern x86-64 architectures where segmentation provides coarse-grained protection but paging handles fine-grained mapping and virtual memory. In x86-64, a flat memory model uses minimal segmentation (e.g., single segment for the entire address space) atop four-level paging hierarchies, supporting up to 2^48 bytes of virtual address space with 4 KB pages, enabling terabyte-scale addressing while maintaining backward compatibility. Similarly, the ARM MMU, which has supported multi-level page tables since ARMv4 in the 1990s and evolved further in versions like ARMv6 (2001) and ARMv8, employs two- to four-level structures for 32- and 64-bit addressing, mapping virtual pages to physical frames with attributes like access permissions and cacheability, scalable to terabyte virtual spaces without banking. These hybrids reduce overhead by using paging for allocation and segmentation for protection where needed.
Bank switching largely faded after the 1990s as 32- and 64-bit address buses proliferated, enabling direct large-address access without hardware multiplexing. For instance, Windows NT, released in 1993, relied on paging-based virtual memory management with 4 KB pages and TLBs for efficient translation, supporting a 4 GB virtual space per process via the 80386 MMU, marking a shift toward OS-mediated abstraction over hardware banking. By the early 2000s, widespread adoption of these techniques in processors like x86 and ARM rendered bank switching obsolete for general computing.
In 2025, graphics processing units (GPUs) exemplify current standards through unified memory architectures, such as NVIDIA's CUDA, which provides a single address space accessible by CPU and GPU without explicit transfers. CUDA's unified memory employs hierarchical paging with on-demand migration and prefetching, leveraging MMU extensions for fine-grained page faults and multi-level tables to manage terabyte-scale datasets across devices, eliminating banking entirely in favor of transparent virtualization.

References

 Minimizing Bank Selection Instructions for Partitioned Memory ...

 . Signature redacted - DSpace@MIT

 Untitled - University of WisconsinMadison

 Byte Oct 1980 - Vintage Apple

The effect of the Harvard architecture on the teaching of assembly ...

Bank switching - Computer History Wiki

PDP-8 Memory Extension units - Computer History Wiki

NES / Famicom Architecture | A Practical Analysis - Rodrigo Copetti

Bank Switching | Big Mess o' Wires

Z80 Memory Mapping/Bank Switching | Details - Hackaday.io

digital logic - What is the application of the 74LS373?

Overlays in Memory Management - GeeksforGeeks

Inside Those CDC Computers

CDC-160A

 CDC 6600

 Extended core storage for the control data 64 6600 systems

Core Memory

Zilog Z80 microprocessor architecture - CPU-World

MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor family - CPU-World

Cromemco S-100 computer - Retrotechnology

 Apple IIe Technical Reference Manual Part 2 - AppleLogic

 c64 programmers reference guide(commodore)

Better way to do Z80 "bank switch & call"?

128K ZX Spectrum Technical Information

Why Were PCs Limited to 640K of RAM (And How Did They Fix It)?

DOS Memory, Managers & Extenders, Part I | OS/2 Museum

The MS-DOS memory environment - ACM Digital Library

Version 4.0 - Phatcode.net

LOTUS, INTEL, MICROSOFT REVISE L/I/M EXPANDED MEMORY ...

Intel - DOS Days

int 67

Microsoft KB Archive/66420 - BetaArchive Wiki

Bank switching, best practices? - 2600 Programming For Newbies

Atari 2600: The Atlantis of Game Consoles - TechSpot

MMC1 - NESdev Wiki

Family Computer Disk System - NESdev Wiki

Cartridge Bankswitching Outside the NES - Nerdly Pleasures

VGA/SVGA Video Programming--Accessing the VGA Display Memory

Memory and Storage Technology - Amiga Hardware Database

None

Sequencer Registers - VGA/SVGA Video Programming - OSDever.net

Code Banking With Keil C51

 Section 6. Memory Organization - Microchip Technology

8051 Code Banking contiki-os/contiki Wiki - GitHub

PIC-IOT WG DEVELOPMENT BOARD - Microchip Technology

Architecture history and extensions - Arm Developer

ARM Architecture Registers and Exception Model

ARM core registers - Arm Developer

The ARM-state register set - Arm Developer

 The ARM Instruction Set Architecture

Memory model - Cortex-M0 - Arm Developer

Cortex-M0 Flash memory aliased from 0x0000_0000 to ... - Reddit

HardFault on ARM Cortex-M0+ - #12 by mramirez - Kernel

Navigating the Cortex Maze - Architectures and Processors blog

ARM Cortex-M RTOS Context Switching - Interrupt - Memfault

Extended 8051 Variants - Arm Developer

IoT Markets Internet of Things Markets - Arm

IoT Trends To Drive Innovation For Business In 2025 - MobiDev

 Minimizing Bank Selection Instructions for Partitioned Memory ...

 Advantages and Pitfall of Moving from an 8 bit System to 32 bit ... - HAL

Mega Man 3's Graphical Glitches, the MMC3 Mapper, and a Bad ...

 Intel 80286 Programmer's Reference Manual - Bitsavers.org

 INTEL 80386 PROGRAMMER'S REFERENCE MANUAL 1986

Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer Manuals

Multilevel translation - Learn the architecture - Arm Developer

The Virtual-Memory Manager in Windows NT - LaBRI

CUDA C++ Programming Guide
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion