CAR and CDR Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
CAR and CDR
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 In computer programming, specifically in the Lisp family of languages, CAR (pronounced /kr/) and CDR (pronounced /kr di r/ or /kdr/) are primitive operations on cons cells, a fundamental data structure consisting of two pointers: one to the "car" (contents of the address part of the register) and one to the "cdr" (contents of the decrement part of the register). These operations, originating from assembly language macros on the IBM 704 computer in the late 1950s, allow access to the head and tail of linked lists, forming the basis for Lisp's list-processing capabilities.
CAR returns the first component of a cons cell, while CDR returns the second; their compositions (e.g., CADR for car of cdr) enable complex list manipulations central to Lisp's symbolic computation paradigm. Developed by John McCarthy as part of early Lisp implementations, CAR and CDR have influenced functional programming and remain standard in modern dialects like Common Lisp and Scheme, despite aliases like first/rest in some languages for readability.

Fundamentals

Cons Cells

A cons cell is the fundamental data structure in Lisp, consisting of an ordered pair that holds two Lisp objects, typically referred to as the head (or car) and the tail (or cdr). This pair is created by the (/page/Cons) function, which constructs a new cell linking the two elements without modifying existing structures.
The structure of a cons cell can be represented textually as (head . (/page/Tail)), where head occupies the first slot and tail the second, allowing each to point to atoms, other cons cells, or the empty list nil. For example:
 +----------+
head | | tail
 +----------+
 ^ ^
 | |
 (A . (B . nil))
This notation illustrates how cons cells serve as building blocks, with the dot separating the two components.
Historically, cons cells were introduced by John McCarthy in his 1960 paper on recursive functions of symbolic expressions, forming the core of Lisp's design for list processing and symbolic computation. As the primary building block, they enable the representation of lists through chaining, where the tail of one cell points to the head of the next, terminated by nil; this extends to more complex structures like trees, where both slots can recursively reference further cons cells.
In pure Lisp semantics, as outlined in McCarthy's foundational work, cons cells exhibit immutability: the cons operation always produces a new cell, preserving the functional purity of expressions without altering prior data. This property supports recursive definitions and safe composition of symbolic structures. CAR and CDR function as the primary accessors to retrieve the head and tail of these cells, respectively.

CAR Operation

The CAR operation, introduced in the foundational Lisp system, retrieves the first component, or "address" field, of a cons cell, which represents an ordered pair in symbolic expressions. In John McCarthy's original 1960 specification, CAR is defined as an elementary S-function applicable only to non-atomic expressions: for a cons cell denoted as (e1e2)(e_1 \cdot e_2)(e1e2), CAR=e1\text{CAR} = e_1CAR=e1. This extracts the head or initial element, enabling the decomposition of nested structures such as lists.
Semantically, CAR operates on the pointer to the contents stored in the first field of the cons cell, returning that value directly without modifying the structure. For example, if a cons cell holds an atom like X in its car field paired with another expression A, then (/page/Car)=X\text{(/page/Car)} = X(/page/Car)=X; similarly, (/page/Car)=(XA)\text{(/page/Car)} = (X \cdot A)(/page/Car)=(XA). In pseudocode terms, the operation can be represented as:
function CAR(cell):
 if cell is a cons:
 return cell.car // the first field/pointer
 else:
 undefined // per original specification
This simple access primitive forms the basis for pattern matching and recursive evaluation in Lisp programs.
Regarding error handling, the original Lisp definition deems CAR undefined for atomic inputs, such as symbols or numbers, to prevent invalid operations on non-pair structures. Modern implementations, such as Common Lisp, extend this behavior: CAR returns nil when applied to nil (treating the empty list as a valid, terminating case), but signals a type-error for any other non-list object, ensuring type safety in list processing.
In list processing, CAR plays a central role by providing access to the first element of a singly linked list representation, where lists are chains of cons cells with atoms in the car fields and the remainder in the cdr fields. This facilitates fundamental algorithms like head-tail recursion, where the head is inspected via CAR before recursing on the tail, as seen in early symbolic computation tasks such as expression evaluation.

CDR Operation

The CDR operation, short for "contents of decrement register," is a primitive function in Lisp that retrieves the second component, or tail, of a cons cell. In the foundational definition by John McCarthy, CDR is an elementary S-function applicable only to non-atomic S-expressions, where for a pair (e1e2)(e_1 \cdot e_2)(e1e2), cdr=e2\mathrm{cdr} = e_2cdr=e2. This semantics positions CDR as the counterpart to CAR, focusing on the "decrement portion" of the underlying machine register structure in early Lisp implementations on the IBM 704, which stored list elements in address and decrement fields.
Semantically, when applied to proper lists, CDR returns the sublist excluding the first element; for example, cdr=(BC)\mathrm{cdr} = (B \cdot C)cdr=(BC), and for a singleton list cdr=NIL\mathrm{cdr} = \mathrm{NIL}cdr=NIL. On improper lists or dotted pairs, it yields the second component directly, such as cdr=B\mathrm{cdr} = Bcdr=B. Regarding error handling, CDR is undefined for atomic inputs like symbols, as Lisp's original specification restricts it to composite structures to prevent invalid access; applying it to an atom such as cdr\mathrm{cdr}cdr results in unspecified behavior, and in implementations like Common Lisp, it signals a type-error for non-list arguments (except NIL, which returns NIL).
A simple schematic representation of the CDR operation on a cons cell can be expressed in pseudocode as:
function CDR(cons_cell):
 if cons_cell is atomic:
 undefined // or NIL in some implementations
 else:
 return cons_cell.tail // the second pointer or sublist
This extracts the tail value, enabling chained access in list structures.
In list processing, CDR plays a crucial role by facilitating recursive traversal of linked lists, where repeated applications peel off elements from the front, supporting tail-recursive patterns essential for efficient functional programming in Lisp. For instance, it underpins algorithms like mapping over lists without explicit loops, leveraging Lisp's homoiconic nature for self-referential computation.

Etymology and History

Origins in IBM 704

The IBM 704, introduced by IBM in 1954, marked a significant advancement in computing hardware as the first mass-produced computer to incorporate index registers, which facilitated modified addressing modes for more efficient program execution in scientific and engineering applications. This vacuum-tube-based mainframe featured 36-bit words, with each word structured into distinct fields: a 3-bit prefix, a 15-bit decrement (used for address modification), a 3-bit tag (for instruction classification), and a 15-bit address. The index registersthree in numberenabled programmers to perform base-plus-offset calculations, allowing indirect-like addressing through decrement adjustments without full indirect addressing hardware, which was later added in the IBM 709.
The operations CAR and CDR emerged directly from the IBM 704's register and instruction architecture, where registers mirrored the word structure with address and decrement components. CAR, standing for "Contents of the Address part of Register," was an operation that extracted or fetched the memory contents at the address held in a register's address field, essential for accessing data pointed to by a location. Conversely, CDR, meaning "Contents of the Decrement part of Register," extracted the memory contents at the address held in a register's decrement field, essential for accessing the tail of lists. These were not standalone machine instructions but derived from combinations of basic 704 operations like load address (LDA) and transfer index (TXI), which leveraged the index registers for efficient computation.
In assembly programming on the 704, CAR and CDR proved invaluable for constructing and traversing linked data structures, such as chains of words where the address field pointed to the head element (via CAR) and the decrement field pointed to the next element (via CDR), enabling the construction of linked lists. For instance, programmers could use index register instructions like load index decrement (LXD) to retrieve the decrement part for loop counters or offsets in list processing, enabling the simulation of dynamic structures in core memory without dedicated list hardware. This approach optimized memory usage in the 704's limited core storage, typically ranging from 4K to 32K words.
John McCarthy encountered and utilized these 704 features during the development of Lisp at MIT in 1958, where the AI research group implemented an early Lisp interpreter by hand-compiling expressions to 704 assembly code, directly incorporating CAR and CDR for list manipulation. McCarthy's work on the machine's architecture influenced Lisp's foundational list-processing model, adapting the hardware's addressing primitives to software operations for symbolic computation.

Macro Development

In Lisp 1.5, released in 1962, CAR and CDR were introduced as primitive functions essential for list manipulation, serving as the foundational accessors for cons cells in symbolic expressions. These operations allowed programmers to extract the first element (CAR) and the remaining elements (CDR) of a non-atomic S-expression, enabling efficient navigation through list structures without requiring user-defined recursion for basic access. John McCarthy designed CAR and CDR to map directly to hardware-level operations on the IBM 704, transforming low-level address and decrement registers into high-level symbolic list accessors that supported algebraic processing of expressions.
Early implementations of CAR and CDR in Lisp interpreters relied on machine code subroutines for performance, classified as SUBRs (special subroutines) that bypassed the standard evaluation mechanism to directly manipulate memory representations of lists. This approach ensured minimal overhead, as CAR and CDR were executed via inline assembly instructions like CLA and PAX on the IBM 704, avoiding the interpretive overhead of general function calls. In the LISP I system documented in AI Memo 15 (1960), these primitives were already core to the language, with their machine-language implementation pointing to transfer instructions for rapid execution.
By the mid-1960s, CAR and CDR achieved standardization through key Lisp reports and memos from the MIT Artificial Intelligence Project, solidifying their role in subsequent dialects and ensuring portability across implementations. This evolution emphasized their use in composing more complex selectors, such as caddr, where multiple applications could access arbitrary subexpressions. Crucially, as primitives rather than recursive functions, CAR and CDR facilitated efficient compositions without incurring deep recursion stacks, a design choice that supported early AI applications involving nested symbolic computations.

Naming Conventions

The names CAR and CDR originate from the early implementation of Lisp on the IBM 704 computer, where CAR stands for "Contents of the Address part of Register number" and CDR for "Contents of the Decrement part of Register number." These terms derived from the hardware registers used in the machine's list-processing macros, with the address part holding a pointer to the car and the decrement part holding a pointer to the cdr for sequential access. John McCarthy introduced these in his foundational 1960 paper on Lisp, defining them as primitives for accessing the components of symbolic expressions represented as linked lists.
Compositions of CAR and CDR follow a systematic naming convention to denote nested access patterns on cons cells, starting with a 'C' followed by one or more 'A's and 'D's (alternating between address and decrement operations), and ending with an 'R'. For instance, CAAR applies CAR to the result of CAR, extracting the car of the car of a given cell. This pattern allows for concise expression of multi-level traversals without recursive definitions. Standard Lisp dialects limit predefined compositions to four levels deep, yielding 28 distinct functions such as CADDDAR, which performs CAR, then three CDRs, then CAR. Beyond four levels, programmers compose them manually or use higher-order functions.
In Common Lisp, this convention is standardized in the ANSI specification, where functions like FIRST (alias for CAR) and REST (alias for CDR) provide more intuitive names for list operations while preserving the original primitives for pairs. Scheme, as defined in the Revised5 Report (R5RS), similarly standardizes CAR and CDR with compositions up to four levels, emphasizing their role in pair manipulation, though it lacks built-in aliases like FIRST in the core language. The rationale for these names lies in their mnemonic utility for the original hardware context, facilitating efficient assembly-level coding, but they evolved into symbolic abstractions for the head (CAR) and tail (CDR) of lists, promoting a uniform model for symbolic computation across Lisp variants.

Operations and Compositions

Basic Compositions

Basic compositions of CAR and CDR form fundamental operations in Lisp for accessing elements within cons cells and lists. These two-letter functions, such as CAAR and CADR, apply a sequence of one CAR and one CDR operation, enabling efficient navigation of list structures without explicit nesting in code. The naming convention prefixes "C" to indicate the composition, followed by "A" for each CAR and "D" for each CDR (read from right to left in application order), and ends with "R".
CADR retrieves the second element of a list by applying CAR to the result of CDR, effectively accessing the head of the tail. For example, in a list (1 2 3), (CADR lst) yields 2, which is useful in pattern matching to extract arguments or sublists. CDAR, conversely, applies CDR to the CAR of a cons, extracting the tail of the first element, such as the components following the head in a nested structure like ((a b) c).
CAAR accesses the first element of the first element by applying CAR twice, targeting the head within the head, as in retrieving a from ((a b) c). CDDR skips the first two elements by applying CDR twice, returning the rest of the list after the second item, which supports iterative processing or tail recursion in list manipulation. These operations handle nil gracefully by returning nil, ensuring robustness in list traversal.
The following table summarizes common two-letter compositions and their roles in list processing:
CompositionDescriptionExample Usage
CAARCAR of the CAR: first element of the first cons(CAAR '((a b) c)) yields a
CADRCAR of the CDR: second element of the list(CADR '(1 2 3)) yields 2
CDARCDR of the CAR: tail of the first cons(CDAR '((a b) c)) yields (b)
CDDRCDR of the CDR: rest after the second element(CDDR '(1 2 3)) yields (3)

Advanced Patterns

In Lisp programming, advanced patterns of CAR and CDR compositions extend beyond basic two-level operations to handle deeper list structures and more complex traversals. For instance, three-level compositions such as CADDR, which is equivalent to (car (cdr (cdr x))), access the third element of a list, while four-level ones like CADDDR, defined as (car (cdr (cdr (cdr x)))), retrieve the fourth element. These predefined functions in Common Lisp facilitate targeted access without manual nesting, though they are limited to four levels to maintain practicality.
More intricate patterns emerge in operations requiring repeated applications, such as approximating "butlast" functionality through multiple CDRs to discard trailing elements. For example, (nthcdr (- (length list) n) list) effectively skips the first elements using successive CDRs, enabling the construction of list tails without the last n items, though built-in functions like BUTLAST are preferred for clarity. Tree traversal patterns alternate CAR and CDR to navigate hierarchical structures, as in recursive functions that process a node's value via CAR and recurse on its children via CDR, common for parsing nested lists representing trees like search or expression trees.
Idiomatic uses of these compositions appear in macro definitions, such as DEFMACRO, where argument lists are deconstructed: the first argument is often extracted with CAR, and remaining parameters via CDR, allowing dynamic code generation from list forms. In recursive algorithms, patterns like processing the CAR of a list and recursing on its CDR form the backbone of functions such as flattening nested structures or counting atoms, promoting functional decomposition over iteration. For example, a flatten function might define:
(defun flatten (lst)
 (if (null lst) nil
 (if (atom (car lst))
 (cons (car lst) (flatten (cdr lst)))
 (append (flatten (car lst)) (flatten (cdr lst))))))
This alternates CAR for atom checks and CDR for tail recursion, handling arbitrary nesting.
However, deep nesting of CAR and CDR compositions, such as CADADR or beyond four levels, compromises readability and increases error risk, as the sequence of operations becomes opaque without careful tracing. Lisp systems mitigate this by favoring higher-level abstractions like NTH or FIRST/SECOND/THIRD for indexed access, which internally compose CAR/CDR but abstract away the machinery. Historically, these patterns were pivotal in early AI programs, where CAR/CDR enabled symbolic manipulation of knowledge representations as lists, supporting recursive search and pattern matching in systems like those for theorem proving or natural language processing.

Implementations

In Lisp Systems

In Lisp systems, CAR and CDR serve as primitive built-in functions for accessing the components of cons cells, forming the foundational operations for list manipulation across major dialects. In Common Lisp, they are defined as standard functions in the COMMON-LISP package, enabling direct extraction of the car (first element) and cdr (rest of the list) from a cons or list. Similarly, in Scheme as specified by the R5RS standard, car and cdr are primitive procedures that return the contents of the respective fields of a pair, with the empty list handled as an error for these operations. Clojure does not include car and cdr in its core library, instead providing first and rest operations on sequences for accessing the first element and the remainder, respectively, while favoring more abstract interfaces like seq for general use.
Implementations of CAR and CDR in Lisp interpreters typically involve direct memory access to the cons cell structure, which consists of two slots: the car at offset 0 and the cdr at offset 8 in 64-bit architectures. In systems like SBCL (Steel Bank Common Lisp), cons cells are represented as two consecutive words in memory, with pointers tagged for garbage collection; CAR accesses the first word (adjusted for the lowtag of 7 on x86-64), and CDR the second, ensuring efficient low-overhead retrieval without function call overhead in optimized paths. This memory layout allows interpreters to perform these operations as simple pointer dereferences, minimizing runtime cost for list traversal.
Compilers such as SBCL further optimize CAR and CDR through inlining and virtual operations (VOPs), transforming calls into direct assembly instructions for zero-cost abstraction during compilation. For instance, SBCL's backend defines %CAR and %CDR as inline VOPs that emit machine code for immediate slot access, avoiding the dispatch of a full function call and enabling subsequent optimizations like register allocation. This inlining is particularly effective in hot paths, such as recursive list processing, where composed operations like cadr (car of cdr) can be fully unrolled.
Dialects vary in their treatment of cons mutability, influencing how CAR and CDR interact with list structures. Common Lisp supports mutable cons cells via rplaca and rplacd, which destructively replace the car or cdr component, allowing in-place modifications while CAR and CDR provide non-destructive reads. Scheme, per R5RS, offers set-car! and set-cdr! for similar mutable updates on pairs, though many implementations encourage functional styles to avoid side effects. In contrast, Clojure enforces immutability through persistent data structures, where cons, first, and rest operate on shared nodes without alteration, promoting thread safety and versioned lists.
Performance benefits in Lisp systems often arise from tail-call optimization (TCO) in recursive functions that leverage CDR for list tail recursion, such as computing list length or mapping. SBCL and other Common Lisp compilers implement proper TCO, converting (cdr)-based recursions into loops at compile time, preventing stack overflow for deep lists and achieving linear-time execution with constant stack usage. This optimization is crucial for idiomatic Lisp code, where patterns like (if (null list) base-case (recur (cdr list) ...)) directly benefit from CDR's role in advancing the list pointer.

Hardware and Low-Level

The hardware implementations of CAR and CDR operations trace their roots to specialized Lisp machines designed in the late 1970s and 1980s, which incorporated dedicated instructions and microcode to accelerate cons cell access. In the MIT CADR Lisp machine, introduced in 1980, cons cells were represented as pairs of 32-bit words (Q's), with a 2-bit CDR code in each Q dictating the structure: code 0 indicated a normal node where the CDR pointed to the next Q, code 1 denoted a NIL CDR, code 2 specified a forward CDR to the subsequent Q, and code 3 marked the second half of a Q. The processor featured a 32-bit data path and 4K-word control store for microcode, enabling efficient operations like PCDR, which popped data from the stack, computed the CDR, and stored it at an effective address. Microcode handled "invisible pointers" such as INVZ-CAR-CDR, allowing indirect CDR computation without altering the CAR, which facilitated optimizations like RPLACDs for in-place modifications.
Symbolics Lisp Machines, such as the 3600 series from the early 1980s and the later single-chip Ivory processor (1987), extended these concepts with 40-bit tagged architectures optimized for Lisp primitives. The Ivory processor included a 4-stage pipeline, 128-word top-of-stack cache, and 62-word scratchpad for rapid operand access, with high-level microcode in a 1200-word 180-bit ROM supporting CAR, CDR, and cons as primitive instructions. Tagging logic performed parallel type checks during ALU operations, ensuring no overhead for common cases, while CDR-coded lists compacted memory by embedding list structure in low-order bits, improving virtual memory efficiency and traversal speed. Microcode executed these operations in a few cycles, leveraging the processor's design to minimize pointer indirection latency.
In software implementations using C, cons cells are typically mapped to structs for low-level portability across general-purpose hardware. A common representation is struct cons { void *car; void *cdr; };, where CAR and CDR access occurs via pointer dereference (cons->car and cons->cdr), mimicking Lisp's pair structure while allowing integration with C's memory model. This approach, used in interpreters like those for Scheme or embedded Lisp runtimes, enables efficient allocation via malloc or custom pools, though it requires manual tag bits or unions for Lisp-style immediate values. Access remains O(1) but incurs cache penalties on non-contiguous allocations, contrasting hardware-native versions.
Garbage collection (GC) in Lisp systems integrates CAR and CDR tracing to reclaim unused cons cells, treating them as root pointers in mark-and-sweep or copying collectors. In the Symbolics 3600's incremental copying GC, the scavenger begins with root sets like interned symbols and stack frames, then recursively follows CAR and CDR pointers from live cons cells to evacuate reachable objects to a copyspace using a modified Cheney algorithm. When moving objects, forwarding pointers update all referencing CAR/CDR fields, ensuring no dangling references; this process scans memory incrementally to avoid pauses, with ephemeral GC handling short-lived cells via a reference table (GCPT/ESRT) that tracks potential CAR/CDR sources without full scans. In C-based implementations, tracing follows similar pointer chains from roots (e.g., global variables, stacks), marking cons cells and updating pointers during compaction.
Modern CPUs optimize CAR/CDR-like list traversals through cache-aware techniques rather than dedicated instructions, as general-purpose processors lack Lisp-specific hardware. In Common Lisp systems like Allegro CL on Pentium III-era hardware (32 KB L1 cache, 32-byte lines holding four cons cells), GC-induced compaction rearranges cons cells sequentially, reducing L1 misses by up to 76% (e.g., from 9.5710^8 to 2.2510^8 for large lists) and speeding traversals 1.74 by improving locality. SIMD extensions (e.g., SSE/AVX) offer limited benefits for irregular pointer chasing in cons chains due to branchy access patterns, but vectorized operations can process multiple CAR/CDR extractions in parallel for flat or unrolled lists, leveraging out-of-order execution to prefetch CDRs. Cache prefetching hardware in contemporary x86 CPUs (e.g., Intel's hardware prefetchers) further mitigates misses during sequential CDR traversal, though random list access remains bottlenecked by pointer indirection.

Adoption in Other Languages

Functional Languages

In functional languages derived from Lisp, CAR and CDR concepts manifest as primitives or equivalents for destructuring pairs and lists, emphasizing immutable data structures and recursion. These languages inherit the pair-based representation from Lisp but adapt it to their evaluation models and type systems, often prioritizing readability and safety over historical nomenclature.
Scheme, a minimalist dialect of Lisp, includes the primitives car and cdr to access the first and second components of a pair, respectively, paired with cons for constructing pairs that form the basis of lists. These operations are foundational for list manipulation in Scheme and were standardized in the Revised^5 Report on the Scheme Programming Language (R5RS), published in 1998, which mandates their implementation for portable code.
Clojure, a modern Lisp on the JVM, diverges from direct car and cdr usage by providing first and next (or rest) as the primary functions for accessing the head and tail of sequences, including lists, to promote a more approachable interface while maintaining Lisp-like expressiveness. Although car and cdr are not built-in, Clojure's macro system and libraries allow their definition for compatibility with traditional Lisp code, enabling seamless interoperation with Lisp heritage.
Haskell, a purely functional language without direct Lisp ancestry, employs fst and snd for extracting the first and second elements of tuples (fixed-size pairs), while head and tail serve analogous roles for lists. These functions align with Lisp's CAR/CDR by enabling pattern matching and recursion on data structures, but Haskell's lazy evaluation defers computation until needed, contrasting with the eager evaluation in Lisp-derived languages.
Racket, an extension of Scheme focused on teaching and extensibility, retains built-in car and cdr for pair and list access, consistent with its Lisp roots. For pedagogical purposes, Racket introduces define-struct (now evolved into struct) to define record-like structures with named fields, offering an alternative to anonymous pairs and encouraging structured data in educational contexts without relying solely on car/cdr compositions.
A key difference across these languages lies in evaluation strategies: Scheme, Clojure, and Racket use strict (eager) evaluation, where cdr immediately traverses to the tail, potentially forcing full list construction upfront. In contrast, Haskell's laziness allows tail to represent unevaluated thunks, enabling more efficient infinite or large data streams but requiring careful handling of strictness annotations to avoid space leaks during traversal.

Imperative and General-Purpose

In imperative and general-purpose programming languages, CAR and CDR-like operations are typically implemented not as primitive constructs but as library functions, indexing patterns, or destructuring syntax that mimic the head-tail decomposition of cons cells from Lisp. These adaptations allow developers to extract the first element (analogous to CAR) and the remaining elements (analogous to CDR) from lists or pair-like structures, facilitating recursive processing and pattern matching in non-functional paradigms. Such features draw inspiration from Lisp's foundational data manipulation primitives, enabling efficient handling of sequential data without requiring full functional programming support.
In Python, a dynamically typed imperative language, list slicing provides a straightforward way to perform CAR and CDR operations: the head of a list lst is accessed via lst, while the tail is obtained using lst, which returns a new list excluding the first element. This indexing approach is efficient for contiguous arrays underlying Python lists, with O(1) time for head access and O(n) for tail slicing in the worst case due to copying. For pair-like structures, the collections.namedtuple from the standard library allows defining immutable tuples with named fields, such as a Point with .x (CAR equivalent) and .y (CDR equivalent), promoting readable decomposition in imperative code.
Java, an object-oriented imperative language, lacks built-in CAR/CDR primitives but supports similar patterns through its java.util.LinkedList class, where getFirst() retrieves the head element in O(1) time, and iterators or listIterator(1) can traverse the tail starting from the second node. These operations are particularly useful in doubly-linked implementations for maintaining order in collections, though they require manual iteration for full tail extraction unlike Lisp's atomic CDR. Custom pair classes can also emulate cons cells, but standard library patterns emphasize mutable state over immutable decomposition.
C++ incorporates pair handling via the std::pair template in the <utility> header, where .first and .second members directly correspond to CAR and CDR for two-element aggregates, supporting structured bindings in C++17 for destructuring like auto = pair;. For list-like structures, the std::list container allows front access via front() for the head and iterators for the tail, with custom cons-cell classes often implemented using pointers to enable Lisp-style recursion in performance-critical code. These features blend imperative control flow with functional decomposition, as seen in standard library algorithms like std::transform on list ranges.
JavaScript, a multi-paradigm language with imperative roots, introduced array destructuring in ECMAScript 6 (ES6, 2015), enabling concise head-tail extraction such as const = (/page/Array);, where head is the first element and tail the rest as a new array, with O(n) overhead for the spread operator due to shallow copying. This syntax facilitates functional-style operations in imperative scripts, such as recursive array processing without loops. Lisp-inspired libraries like Underscore.js further extend this with utility functions _.first((/page/Array)) for CAR and _.rest((/page/Array)) (alias _.tail) for CDR, providing cross-browser compatibility and chainable methods that echo Lisp's list manipulation heritage.

References

CAR T Cells: Engineering Immune Cells to Treat Cancer

Antibody Complementarity-Determining Regions (CDRs) Can ... - NIH

CD19 CAR antigen engagement mechanisms and affinity tuning

Complementarity-determining region clustering may cause CAR-T ...

 Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their ...

https://www.softwarepreservation.org/projects/LISP/book/LISP%201.5%20Programmers%20Manual.pdf

 Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their ...

Accessor CAR, CDR, CAAR, CADR, CDAR... - CLHS

LISP prehistory - Summer 1956 through Summer 1958.

 The IBM 701-7094 II

 IBM 704 Manual of Operation - Bitsavers.org

 CODING for the MIT-IBM 704 COMPUTER - Bitsavers.org

History of Lisp

 History of Lisp - John McCarthy

https://www.softwarepreservation.org/projects/LISP/book/LISP%20I%20Programmers%20Manual.pdf

Accessor CAR, CDR, CAAR, CADR, CDAR... - CLHS

12. They Called It LISP for a Reason: List Processing - gigamonkeys

None

Macro Forms (GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual)

Pairs and lists - Revised(5) Scheme - People | MIT CSAIL

Memory Layout of an SBCL Cons Cell ($34912) Snippets - GitLab

https://www.sbcl.org/manual/#Tail-Call-Optimization

 The LISP Machine - Bitsavers.org

 The Symbolics Ivory Processor: A 40 Bit Tagged Architecture Lisp ...

Architecture of the Symbolics 3600 - ACM Digital Library

Cons Cell Type (GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual)

 Garbage Collection in a Large Lisp System

 Memory Cache and Lisp: Faster list processing via automatically ...

Revised(5) Scheme - Standard procedures

 r5rs.pdf - Scheme Conservatory

klutometis/cadr: Implementing car, cdr, cadr, ..., cddddr in ... - GitHub

https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base/docs/Data-List.html#v:head

4.10 Pairs and Lists - Racket Documentation

5.1 Defining Structure Types: struct - Racket Documentation
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion