Cisco IOS Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 27 days ago 
Cisco IOS
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Cisco IOS, or Internetwork Operating System, is a family of proprietary network operating systems developed by Cisco Systems, Inc., designed to run on the company's routers, switches, and other networking devices. It serves as the core software that manages device operations, enabling functions such as packet forwarding, routing, switching, and network security through a command-line interface (CLI). As the foundational operating system for Cisco's internetworking solutions, IOS integrates hardware control, protocol support, and value-added services to facilitate reliable data transmission across enterprise and service provider networks.
Developed in the 1980s to support Cisco's early routers, which operated with limited resources like 256 KB of memory and low CPU power, IOS evolved from basic routing software into a sophisticated, multitasking system optimized for internetworking. The first major releases appeared in the late 1980s, with Cisco IOS 8.3 marking a key milestone before the 1990s, followed by version 9.1's first customer shipment in December 1992. Over decades, IOS has become the world's most widely deployed networking software, incorporating standards-based support for major networking protocols such as IP (via routing protocols like OSPF and BGP), IPX (in earlier versions), and others.
Key features of Cisco IOS include scalable feature sets tailored to specific hardware and network needs, such as IP routing, access control lists (ACLs), quality of service (QoS), and security mechanisms to defend against threats. It utilizes a modular architecture with release versions formatted as A.B(C)D for example, 12.2(7)Tallowing for maintenance, technology, and special releases to address evolving requirements. IOS devices require compatible memory, including DRAM for runtime operations and Flash for image storage, ensuring performance in diverse environments from small offices to large-scale data centers.
While the core IOS remains central to many Cisco products, newer platforms increasingly run IOS XE, an evolution providing enhanced modularity and programmability. It has also inspired related operating systems like IOS XR for high-end service provider routers and NX-OS for data center switches, each drawing from IOS's foundational principles to meet modern demands for automation, security, and cloud integration.

Overview

Definition and Purpose

Cisco IOS is a family of proprietary network operating systems developed by Cisco Systems, designed primarily for routers, switches, and other networking hardware to enable robust internetworking functionality. As the central software layer in these devices, it integrates essential networking services, including support for multiple protocols and hardware platforms, to facilitate seamless data exchange across diverse environments.
The primary purposes of Cisco IOS include controlling packet forwarding and switching, implementing routing decisions, enforcing security measures such as access control lists and encryption, and providing tools for device configuration and management. In enterprise and service provider networks, it acts as the intelligent core that optimizes traffic flow, ensures reliable connectivity, and supports scalable operations for mission-critical applications.
Classic Cisco IOS employs a monolithic architecture, where all functions run as a single, unified process optimized for high-performance internetworking, combining routing and switching capabilities in an integrated framework. Serving as the foundational "brain" of Cisco devices since its early releases in the 1980s, it continues to underpin a substantial share of Cisco's routing infrastructure. Over time, the IOS family has evolved to include modular variants like IOS XE and IOS XR for enhanced flexibility in modern deployments.

Deployment and Usage

Cisco IOS, particularly its modern iteration Cisco IOS XE, is commonly deployed in enterprise wide area network (WAN) routing to connect branch offices and remote sites, enabling secure data transmission and policy enforcement across distributed environments. In ISP backbone networks, it supports high-performance aggregation and edge routing on service provider platforms, handling large-scale traffic routing and peering. For data center switching, IOS XE powers modular Ethernet switches that facilitate high-density connectivity and virtualization in enterprise data centers. Additionally, it integrates with SD-WAN architectures, such as Cisco Catalyst SD-WAN, to overlay intelligent traffic management and optimization on existing WAN infrastructures for multicloud and hybrid environments.
Supported hardware platforms for Cisco IOS XE include branch routers like the ISR 4000 series for edge deployments, aggregation routers such as the ASR 1000 series for service provider and enterprise cores, and enterprise switches including the Catalyst 9000 series (e.g., 9300, 9400, and 9500 models) for campus and data center fabrics. Compatibility extends to 2025 models, including the Cisco Secure Routers 8000 series and C9300 Smart Switches, with ongoing support for updated Catalyst 9000 variants and ISR/ASR series through Cisco's software maintenance releases, ensuring alignment with evolving hardware like AI-optimized networking appliances.
As of 2025, Cisco IOS powers millions of networking devices globally, contributing to Cisco's leading position in the networking equipment market, with a 26.3% share in enterprise network equipment as of 2024. Migration trends show increasing adoption of cloud-managed configurations via Cisco DNA Center, which automates provisioning and assurance for IOS XE devices, with enterprises shifting from traditional on-premises management to intent-based networking.
The installation and boot process for Cisco IOS begins with the ROM monitor (ROMMON) firmware initializing hardware upon power-on or reset, followed by loading the IOS image from flash memory if available. Image verification occurs via checksum checks to ensure integrity before execution, preventing corrupted loads. If the flash image is absent or invalid, administrators can boot from a TFTP server in ROMMON mode using commands like tftpdnld to download and run the image temporarily, enabling recovery. Initial configuration is performed via console port access, setting basic parameters like hostname and IP addressing before saving to startup-config for persistent reboots.

History

Origins and Early Development

Cisco IOS originated in 1984 at Stanford University, where computer scientists Leonard Bosack and Sandy Lerner founded Cisco Systems to address the challenge of interconnecting disparate campus networks that used incompatible protocols. Their work built upon foundational router software developed earlier at Stanford by engineer Bill Yeager, who in 1980 created a multiprotocol routing system to link diverse computers, including those equipped with Ethernet hardware donated by Xerox PARC. This software handled protocols such as XNS (from Xerox Network Systems), IP, and others, running on resource-constrained hardware like a PDP-11/05 minicomputer with just 56 KB of memory.
In 1987, Bosack and Lerner licensed Yeager's software from Stanford's Office of Technology Licensing on behalf of Cisco, adapting it as the core of their initial products. Initially known simply as "the software," it was formalized as the Cisco Internetwork Operating System (IOS) with the launch of Cisco's first commercial router, the Advanced Gateway Server (AGS), in 1986. The AGS enabled reliable data transfer across early internetworking environments, marking a shift from academic experimentation to commercial viability.
Early innovations in IOS centered on robust multi-protocol support and efficient routing mechanisms, including the implementation of the distance-vector Routing Information Protocol (RIP) for IP networks, alongside compatibility for protocols like IPX (for Novell networks) and AppleTalk (for Macintosh systems). These features facilitated multi-protocol routing for the evolving successors to ARPANET, allowing seamless integration of heterogeneous systems without the network crashes common in bridged setups. The system's flexible codebase supported rapid adaptations to customer needs, such as adding bridging capabilities.
The development team expanded from Stanford's small research groupkey contributors included Yeager for the core architecture and Kirk Lougheed for early enhancementsto Cisco's dedicated R&D unit, prioritizing scalable internetworking for academic and enterprise users. This growth transformed the project from a university initiative into the foundation of a global networking standard.

Major Releases and Evolution

The evolution of Cisco IOS began to accelerate in the 1990s as the software matured into a robust platform for enterprise networking. Cisco IOS Release 10.0, shipped in 1992, marked a significant milestone by introducing Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) version 2 for scalable interior gateway routing and Border Gateway Protocol version 4 (BGP-4) for classless interdomain routing, enabling support for IP prefixes and supernets that reduced routing table sizes through aggregation. These additions allowed IOS to handle larger, more complex networks while integrating with protocols like Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP). By Release 11.0 in 1995, IOS enhanced quality of service (QoS) capabilities, including traffic shaping and prioritization for ATM interfaces, and laid precursors to Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) through early tag-switching mechanisms that improved packet forwarding efficiency.
Entering the 2000s, the IOS 12.x series, spanning 2000 to 2008, addressed emerging internet-scale demands with key innovations in scalability and security. IPv6 support was introduced in IOS 12.0(21)ST in 2001, providing native dual-stack operation and enabling transition to next-generation addressing amid IPv4 exhaustion concerns. The series also bolstered security through features like the Adaptive Security Appliance precursors and zone-based policy firewalls in later maintenance releases, while enhancing gigabit Ethernet scalability with hardware-accelerated forwarding on platforms like the Catalyst 6500 series, supporting higher throughput for data centers.
In the 2010s and into the 2020s, IOS shifted toward virtualization and programmability to meet cloud and software-defined networking (SDN) needs. The IOS 15.x series, starting with Release 15.0 in 2011, emphasized virtualization through Virtual Routing and Forwarding (VRF) enhancements and service chaining, allowing segmented network services on shared hardware. By 2025, IOS 15.9(3)M12 provided continued maintenance and security updates for supported platforms, reflecting the ongoing focus on stability as development emphasis shifted to modular variants like IOS XE for new programmability and automation features.
Over its lifespan, Cisco IOS transitioned from proprietary extensions to standards-based implementations, aligning with IETF protocols like OSPF and BGP while accumulating over 500 releases by 2025, prioritizing resilience features such as nonstop forwarding and automated recovery mechanisms. This evolution reflects IOS's adaptation to increasing network complexity, from early routing protocols to modern automation, without delving into specific train structures.

Architecture

Core Components

Cisco IOS employs a monolithic kernel design, where the entire operating system is compiled into a single executable image that integrates both the control planeresponsible for routing decisions and protocol managementand the data plane for packet forwarding. This unified image is loaded directly into random access memory (RAM) during the boot process, eliminating the need for separate modules or dynamic loading of components. The design prioritizes simplicity and efficiency for embedded networking environments but can introduce challenges in scalability and fault isolation compared to modular architectures.
At the heart of this architecture are key components that handle core operations. The IOS kernel directly manages the main system processes, including configuration handling and network service orchestration. Interrupt handlers address time-critical hardware events, such as packet arrivals on interfaces, by directly invoking low-level routines to process them swiftly without full context switches. Integrated protocol stacks support Layer 2 and Layer 3 functionalities, embedding switching, bridging, and routing logic directly into the kernel for seamless operation across network layers.
The process model in Cisco IOS relies on non-preemptive multitasking with cooperative scheduling, where processes voluntarily yield control to others rather than being forcibly interrupted by the scheduler. This approach, combined with the absence of distinct user and kernel modesall code executes in a privileged modestreamlines performance in resource-constrained devices but heightens vulnerability to single points of failure, as a malfunctioning process can impact the entire system.
Hardware abstraction is achieved through device drivers embedded directly within the kernel, tailored for Cisco-specific application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) that offload forwarding tasks and central processing units (CPUs), such as MIPS-based processors common in legacy routers. This tight integration ensures low-latency access to hardware resources without intermediary layers, optimizing for real-time networking demands.

Memory and Process Management

Cisco IOS employs a flat virtual address space model, where the entire physical memory is mapped into a single contiguous virtual address space using the CPU's memory management unit (MMU), without support for paging or swapping. This design simplifies memory access but requires careful management to avoid fragmentation. The address space is divided into distinct regions: I/O memory, typically implemented as shared SRAM accessible by both the CPU and network interface controllers for fast data exchange; processor memory, consisting of DRAM used for executing IOS code, runtime data structures, and heaps; and packet buffers, which are allocated from global memory pools dedicated to temporary storage during packet processing and forwarding.
Memory allocation in Cisco IOS is dynamic and pool-based, with free memory organized into fixed-size chunks to optimize efficiency and reduce fragmentation. General allocations use blocks in sizes such as 24, 84, 144 bytes, up to 131,072 or 262,144 bytes for larger needs. For packet buffers, common pool sizes include small (104 bytes) for control packets, middle (600 bytes), big (1,524 bytes) for standard Ethernet frames, and huge (18,024 bytes) for jumbo frames. Buffers are requested from these pools by various IOS components, such as interface drivers or routing protocols, and returned upon completion of tasks; if a suitable pool is exhausted, IOS may allocate from larger pools or trigger buffer recovery mechanisms to prevent exhaustion during traffic bursts. This approach ensures predictable performance in resource-constrained environments.
Process management in Cisco IOS is event-driven and multitasking, with all processes operating within the shared flat address space, lacking per-process virtual memory protection to prioritize performance over isolation. Key processes, such as the BGP routing process for maintaining peering sessions and the ARP process for address resolution, are activated by events like timer expirations, interrupts, or packet arrivals, rather than continuous polling. The scheduler employs priority queuing to allocate CPU time, categorizing processes into four static levelsCritical (e.g., interrupt handlers), High (e.g., routing updates), Medium (e.g., most protocol processing), and Low (e.g., housekeeping tasks)using a run-to-completion model without preemption. Higher-priority queues are serviced first, with the scheduler skipping low-priority processes up to 15 times before yielding to them, ensuring critical operations like packet forwarding maintain low latency.
For crash recovery, Cisco IOS incorporates checkpointing mechanisms to log critical state information during operation, enabling post-crash analysis via crashinfo files that capture memory dumps, stack traces, and register states. Warm restarts, introduced in IOS 15.0S, facilitate faster recovery by reloading the image directly from RAM without invoking ROM monitor mode or reloading from flash storage, preserving transient states where possible and reducing downtime to seconds in supported scenarios. Buffer overflow protections were enhanced starting with IOS 12.4, including runtime checks and safeguards in memory allocation routines to detect and mitigate heap overflows, preventing exploitation of vulnerabilities that could lead to code execution or denial of service. These features collectively support resilient operation in production networks.
In terms of performance, Cisco IOS supports efficient handling of large forwarding tables such as those used in Cisco Express Forwarding (CEF) for low-latency packet processing on platforms with up to 1 GB DRAM. CEF optimizations leverage dedicated memory pools for adjacency and FIB tables, achieving sub-microsecond forwarding decisions while minimizing CPU involvement. This resource management directly enhances routing efficiency by offloading forwarding from process-scheduled paths to hardware-accelerated lookups.

User Interfaces

Command-Line Interface

The Command-Line Interface (CLI) of Cisco IOS serves as the primary method for configuring and managing network devices, offering a text-based interaction model that emphasizes efficiency and precision. It operates through a hierarchical structure of modes, allowing users to progress from basic monitoring to advanced configuration while maintaining security boundaries. This design enables administrators to perform tasks such as viewing system status, applying global settings, or fine-tuning specific interfaces without disrupting ongoing operations.
Cisco IOS CLI employs a multi-layered mode hierarchy to organize access and functionality. At the base level is user EXEC mode, which provides limited read-only commands for basic connectivity checks and status inquiries, such as displaying version information. To access broader capabilities, users enter privileged EXEC mode using the enable command, which requires authentication and unlocks diagnostic and one-time commands such as show ip route for routing table inspection or reload to reboot the device; exiting this mode uses the disable command. From privileged EXEC, the configure terminal command transitions to global configuration mode for system-wide changes, such as setting hostnames or enabling features. Further specialization occurs in submodes like interface configuration mode, accessed via commands such as interface GigabitEthernet 0/0, where settings specific to a network interfacesuch as IP addressing or speedare applied. These modes form a tree-like structure, with each level inheriting access from the parent while restricting unauthorized actions.
When the reload command is issued in privileged EXEC mode and the running configuration has been modified without saving to the startup configuration, the CLI prompts: "System configuration has been modified. Save? :". Responding with "no" allows the reload to proceed without saving changes, causing the device to revert to the last saved startup configuration upon reboot. There is no built-in flag (e.g., reload nosave) to bypass this interactive prompt for an immediate non-interactive reload.
Command syntax in Cisco IOS CLI relies on keyword-based parsing, where instructions are structured as sequences of keywords, arguments, and options, processed left-to-right for unambiguous interpretation. For instance, the command show ip route displays the IP routing table by combining the show keyword with ip and route subcommands. Navigation is enhanced by features like tab completion, which expands partial inputs (e.g., typing conf and pressing Tab completes to configure terminal), and command history, which buffers up to 256 previously entered lines for recall using arrow keys or Ctrl-P/Ctrl-N. Context-sensitive help is invoked with the ? symbol, providing real-time prompts for available options, syntax details, or argument rangessuch as show ? listing all show subcommands. These aids streamline interaction, reducing errors in complex environments.
Access control in the CLI is enforced through 16 privilege levels ranging from 0 to 15, offering granular role-based permissions. Level 0 restricts to minimal commands like logout, while level 1 corresponds to standard user EXEC access; level 15 grants full privileged EXEC privileges by default. Administrators can assign custom levels to users or commands using the privilege command, integrating with Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) frameworks like TACACS+ or RADIUS for centralized, role-based enforcement. Password protection employs enable secret for stronger encryption (Type 5, based on MD5 hashing, which is non-reversible) at higher levels, though legacy enable password or Type 7 encryption (a weaker, reversible cipher using a simple XOR algorithm with a fixed key) may apply if not overridden, highlighting the need for secure configurations.
For automation, Cisco IOS supports basic scripting via Tool Command Language (Tcl), integrated through the Embedded Event Manager (EEM) subsystem, which allows developers to create custom policies using Tcl version 8.3.4 with IOS-specific extensions for event-driven tasks like interface monitoring or configuration backups. Scripts are authored externally and registered via CLI commands such as event manager policy, enabling conditional logic, loops, and interactions with IOS commands. Additionally, output filtering uses pipe operators (|) to process command results, such as show running-config | include interface to display only lines matching "interface", with built-in modifiers like include, exclude, begin, and grep for pattern-based refinement. These capabilities extend CLI utility for repetitive diagnostics and scripting without external tools.

Graphical and Other Interfaces

Cisco IOS supports several graphical and alternative interfaces beyond the command-line interface, enabling browser-based configuration, monitoring, and programmatic management of network devices. These interfaces facilitate easier access for users less familiar with text-based commands, while also supporting automation and integration in enterprise environments.
Web-based graphical user interfaces (GUIs) provide browser-accessible tools for basic device configuration and monitoring. Cisco Configuration Professional (CCP), a now-retired Java-based GUI application (end-of-support 2020), was designed for managing Cisco IOS software-based routers and switches, offering wizards for tasks such as security setup, routing configuration, and VPN deployment. It connected via HTTPS to the device's IP address and simplified common operations through visual dashboards. Similarly, the Embedded Device Manager (EDM), integrated into certain IOS platforms, delivers an embedded web interface for real-time monitoring of interfaces, performance metrics, and basic troubleshooting, accessible by enabling the HTTP server on the device. These tools are particularly useful for initial setups or less complex environments, though they require enabling web services on the IOS device.
For programmatic and monitoring integrations, Cisco IOS includes support for Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) and Management Information Base (MIB) structures, allowing third-party tools to query device status, interfaces, and performance data remotely. SNMP versions 1, 2c, and 3 are supported, with MIBs covering routing, interfaces, and system information for standardized monitoring. Additionally, NETCONF over SSH with YANG data models was introduced in Cisco IOS XE 16.3.1, providing a structured, XML-based protocol for configuration management and automation, enabling tools like Ansible or custom scripts to push configurations and retrieve operational state data. This model-driven approach enhances interoperability with modern orchestration platforms.
Physical and remote access interfaces complement these for out-of-band management. The serial console port serves as the primary interface for initial device setup, recovery, and troubleshooting during boot or when network access is unavailable, connecting via a rollover cable to a terminal emulator. For remote access, Virtual Teletype (VTY) lines support Telnet for unencrypted sessions and SSH for encrypted connections, and can be configured with various authentication methods including AAA, local usernames and passwords, or simple line passwords to control up to 16 concurrent sessions.
Cisco IOS supports Telnet authentication using only a password (no username required) by configuring the VTY lines with a password and the login command. This configuration prompts the user only for the password upon connection. An example configuration is:
line vty 0 15
 password yourpassword
 login
 transport input telnet
Using login local instead requires a local username and password database configured via the username command. Without the login command or a password set, Telnet access may be denied (e.g., with a "Password required, but none set" message) or unrestricted (not recommended due to security risks).

Core Features

Routing Protocols

Cisco IOS provides robust support for both interior and exterior routing protocols, enabling efficient Layer 3 forwarding in enterprise and service provider networks. Interior Gateway Protocols (IGPs) such as Routing Information Protocol (RIP), Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP), and Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System (IS-IS) facilitate route exchange within an autonomous system (AS), with RIP offering distance-vector simplicity for small networks, OSPF and IS-IS providing link-state scalability for larger topologies, and EIGRP delivering hybrid rapid convergence through Diffusing Update Algorithm (DUAL). For exterior routing, Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) supports both internal (iBGP) peering within an AS and external (eBGP) peering between ASes, allowing policy-based path selection across the internet. These protocols operate in IPv4 and IPv6 dual-stack mode, where IOS maintains separate but interoperable routing tables for each address family, supporting gradual migration without service disruption.
Forwarding in Cisco IOS relies on Cisco Express Forwarding (CEF), an advanced Layer 3 switching technology that prebuilds a Forwarding Information Base (FIB) from the routing table for destination-based lookups and adjacency tables for next-hop resolution, enabling hardware-accelerated packet processing with minimal CPU involvement. CEF operates in distributed mode on multiprocessor platforms, distributing the FIB across line cards for line-rate performance, and supports load balancing via equal-cost multipath (ECMP) or unequal-cost paths in EIGRP environments. This mechanism replaces slower process switching or fast switching, optimizing throughput in high-traffic scenarios.
Advanced routing features in IOS enhance flexibility and isolation. Route redistribution allows injecting routes from one protocol into another, such as sharing OSPF internal routes into BGP, using route maps to filter and metric-adjust entries for controlled propagation. Route summarization aggregates multiple prefixes into a single advertisemente.g., BGP's aggregate-address command or OSPF's area rangeto reduce table sizes and improve convergence, particularly in hierarchical designs. Policy-Based Routing (PBR) overrides standard destination routing by applying route maps to match packet attributes like ACLs or QoS markings, directing traffic to specific next-hops or interfaces for traffic engineering. For multi-tenant environments, Virtual Routing and Forwarding (VRF) instances create isolated routing tables per VPN, integrated with MPLS for Layer 3 VPNs, supporting up to thousands of VRFs on high-end platforms.
In terms of performance, Cisco IOS scales BGP to handle the full internet routing table, currently comprising over 1 million IPv4 unicast routes and hundreds of thousands of IPv6 routes, with hardware like the ASR 1000 series supporting this via optimized memory allocation (e.g., 8 GB DRAM recommended for handling the full table). As of 2025, IOS XE enhancements integrate Segment Routing (SR) more deeply with existing protocols, enabling source-based path control via MPLS labels or IPv6 Segment Identifiers (SIDs) in OSPF and IS-IS, improving scalability for traffic engineering in SR-MPLS and SRv6 deployments without per-flow state.

Switching and Bridging

Cisco IOS provides robust Layer 2 switching and bridging capabilities, enabling efficient frame forwarding within local networks while preventing loops and segmenting traffic. Bridging in Cisco IOS connects multiple LAN segments at the data link layer, treating them as a single broadcast domain, whereas switching uses MAC address-based decisions to forward frames to specific ports, reducing collisions and improving performance. These functions are essential for building scalable Ethernet networks, with support for standards-based protocols that ensure interoperability and reliability.
To prevent loops in bridged and switched topologies, Cisco IOS implements Spanning Tree Protocol (STP), which builds a loop-free logical topology by electing a root bridge and blocking redundant paths. Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP) enhances STP with faster convergence times, typically under 10 seconds, by integrating the roles of root ports and designated ports into a single port state mechanism. Multiple Spanning Tree Protocol (MSTP) extends this further, allowing multiple STP instances to map to distinct VLANs, optimizing bandwidth usage across large networks with VLAN segmentation.
VLAN support in Cisco IOS enables logical segmentation of physical networks, with IEEE 802.1Q trunking allowing multiple VLANs to share a single physical link through frame tagging. Trunk ports encapsulate VLAN information in a 4-byte tag inserted into Ethernet frames, preserving VLAN IDs during transit between switches and supporting up to 4094 VLANs per trunk. This facilitates secure and efficient traffic isolation without requiring dedicated cabling for each VLAN.
The switching architecture in Cisco IOS operates in store-and-forward or cut-through modes to balance latency and error detection. In store-and-forward mode, the switch receives the entire frame, verifies the cyclic redundancy check (CRC), and then forwards it, ensuring only error-free frames are transmitted but introducing slight latency. Cut-through mode forwards the frame upon reading the destination MAC address, minimizing delay for high-speed environments but potentially propagating errors if not combined with features like address error detection. MAC address learning occurs dynamically by inspecting source addresses in incoming frames, populating the Content Addressable Memory (CAM) table, which can hold up to 64,000 entries on supported platforms to map addresses to ports efficiently.
Key features enhance switching reliability and performance, including EtherChannel for link aggregation, which bundles up to eight physical Ethernet links into a logical channel using protocols like LACP (IEEE 802.3ad) to provide up to 800 Mbps aggregate bandwidth with redundancy. For first-hop redundancy, Hot Standby Router Protocol (HSRP) and Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP) enable multiple devices to share a virtual IP address, with automatic failover to a standby router in case of failure, supporting seamless Layer 2 to Layer 3 transitions. Multicast routing integrates via Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM) Sparse Mode, which builds shared trees from a Rendezvous Point (RP) to deliver traffic only to interested receivers, reducing bandwidth overhead in bridged domains.
In multilayer switches running Cisco IOS, Layer 2 switching integrates with Layer 3 routing to support hybrid operations, where frames within VLANs are switched at wire speed while inter-VLAN traffic undergoes routing. Quality of Service (QoS) mechanisms prioritize traffic across these layers, classifying frames based on VLAN tags or MAC addresses and applying queuing policies to ensure low-latency delivery for critical applications like voice over bridged networks. These capabilities complement routing protocols by enabling efficient handling of traffic between bridged domains and routed interfaces.

Versioning and Releases

Naming Conventions

Cisco IOS employs a structured naming convention for its software versions and image files to indicate the release family, feature set, maintenance level, and platform compatibility. The core version format is Major.minor(revision), where each component provides specific information about the software's scope and applicability.
The major number denotes the primary release family or technology level, grouping releases with shared architectural advancements; for instance, the major version 15 represents a convergence of enterprise, service provider, and switching features into unified trains. The minor number follows and signifies incremental feature additions or platform-specific enhancements within that family, such as minor version 2 in 15.2 introducing targeted capabilities. The revision appears in parentheses and tracks bug fixes, security patches, or minor updates, with higher numbers indicating cumulative improvements; an example is (4) in 15.2(4), denoting the fourth revision iteration.
Subsequent identifiers include the , a letter designating the release branch or focus area, such as M for the mainline train emphasizing broad stability or T for technology-oriented updates with new features. The is an optional numeric suffix to the train, representing sequential maintenance rebuilds within that branch, like 7 in 15.2(4)M7 for the seventh rebuild. The suffix specifies hardware or feature compatibility, often abbreviated (e.g., S for service provider routers), while the indicates the file format and content, with .bin denoting a monolithic binary image for complete installations and .tar for modular packages allowing selective feature loading.
Platform-specific feature sets are further denoted by suffixes like IPBASE for basic IP services or ADVSECURITY for advanced security, appended to the version string in image filenames to clarify included functionalities without altering the core version. This convention, akin to semantic versioning, persists in releases as of 2025, with ongoing use of train letters like T to highlight technology or security-focused patches. Full image filenames combine these elements with platform prefixes, such as c2900-universalk9-mz.SPA.15.2(4)M7.bin, where "c2900" targets 2900 series routers and "universalk9" includes cryptographic features.

Release Trains

Cisco IOS releases are organized into distinct "trains" that manage the development, feature integration, and maintenance of software versions, allowing for structured branching and updates across different stability and innovation needs.
Prior to version 15.0, Cisco maintained concurrent release trains such as the Technology (T) train, exemplified by 12.4T, which focused on introducing new features and hardware support while the Mainline train provided broader stability; these trains operated independently until around 2012. In contrast, the post-15.0 model shifted to a unified Maintenance (M) train structure, where features from development branches are merged into a single primary M train, such as 15.9M, which remains an active train as of 2025 with ongoing rebuilds like 15.9(3)M12. Extended Maintenance (EM) trains extend support for select M releases, emphasizing long-term stability without introducing new functionalities.
The branching model ensures controlled evolution: features are frozen at the minor release level within a train, with subsequent updates incorporating bug fixes and merges from short-lived development trains, such as those for new hardware platforms, before integrating back into the main M train. For instance, early branches like 15.1GC for specific platforms were later merged into the 15M train at points like 15.4(3)M to consolidate advancements.
When selecting a release train, administrators are advised to use Technology (T) trains for access to cutting-edge features in non-critical environments, while Maintenance (M) or Extended Maintenance (EM) trains are recommended for production networks prioritizing stability and reliability, as guided by tools like the Cisco Feature Navigator.

Maintenance and Support

Cisco IOS releases undergo a defined support lifecycle to provide reliability and security updates throughout their operational life. Key phases include End-of-Sale (EoS), the final date for ordering the software, and End-of-Support (EoS), the last date for technical assistance from Cisco Technical Assistance Center (TAC). As of 2025, Cisco typically offers 5 years of main support from the EOS date for the final OS release tied to end-of-sale hardware, with an additional 5 years of extended support available through service contracts for eligible releases.
Updates are primarily delivered via maintenance releases, which focus on bug fixes, security patches, and stability improvements without adding new features; these are scheduled within the support period based on the train model. Field Notices complement this by notifying users of significant non-security issues, such as hardware-software incompatibilities, and recommending actions like upgrades or configuration changes.
For platforms approaching end-of-support, migration paths to IOS XE are outlined in official guides, emphasizing compatibility testing and configuration preservation.
Users can leverage the Cisco Software Checker tool to assess release compatibility against security advisories and hardware. Annual support statements detail timelines per release train; for instance, IOS 15.9(3)M, announced for end-of-sale on July 28, 2026, remains under support until July 31, 2031, covering maintenance until July 28, 2027, and security fixes until July 27, 2029.

Licensing and Packages

Feature Sets

Cisco IOS feature sets are predefined bundles of software functionalities that enable users to select and activate specific capabilities tailored to their networking needs, such as routing, security, or switching, without requiring a full operating system overhaul. These sets modularize the extensive feature library of IOS, allowing for scalable deployment across Cisco devices like routers and switches.
The primary feature sets for routing-focused deployments include IP Base, which supports fundamental IP connectivity with features like basic static routing, Routing Information Protocol (RIP), access control lists (ACLs), quality of service (QoS), and rate limiting. IP Services extends this with advanced routing options, including full IPv6 support, IP multicast, enhanced QoS mechanisms, and protocols such as Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP) and Open Shortest Path First (OSPF). For security-oriented configurations, the IP Advanced Security set incorporates IP Base functionalities plus zone-based firewalls, IPsec VPNs, Dynamic Multipoint VPN (DMVPN), FlexVPN, and Group Encrypted Transport VPN (GETVPN), enabling comprehensive threat mitigation and secure remote access.
Feature sets comprise grouped collections of over 200 individual IOS features, categorized by function; for instance, the LAN Base set targets Layer 2 switching environments and includes VLAN support, Spanning Tree Protocol enhancements, and basic security features like port security, suitable for access-layer deployments. Administrators can explore and verify feature availability across platforms and versions using the Cisco Feature Navigator tool, which allows comparison of sets to ensure compatibility.
Activation of feature sets occurs through licensing mechanisms, where permanent licenses provide indefinite access upon installation of a license key, while right-to-use (RTU) licenses offer temporary or evaluation-based enablement on an honor system without hardware enforcement. At runtime, the IOS software checks feature flags to enable or disable functionalities based on the active license, ensuring only authorized capabilities are operational.
Feature set availability may vary by IOS version, as detailed in the versioning section.

Licensing Models

Cisco IOS licensing has evolved from traditional perpetual models to a more flexible, software-defined approach centered on Smart Licensing, which supports both perpetual and subscription-based entitlements managed through the Cisco Smart Software Manager (CSSM). Perpetual licenses, common in older IOS versions, represent a one-time purchase granting indefinite use of specific features without ongoing fees, often implemented via Right-to-Use (RTU) mechanisms where activation occurs through software evaluation followed by permanent enablement. In contrast, the subscription model, established as the standard by 2025, involves recurring payments for access to features, updates, and support, enabling usage-based billing and scalability through cloud integration.
Smart Licensing, introduced as the primary framework starting with IOS XE releases around 2017, automates license activation, tracking, and compliance by connecting devices to the CSSM portal for centralized management of both perpetual and subscription licenses. This shift to software-defined licensing in 2017 replaced manual key installations with token-based registration, allowing devices to report usage periodicallytypically every 30 daysand dynamically adjust entitlements without hardware dependencies. By 2025, enhanced cloud integration via the Cisco Licensing Hub supports granular usage-based billing, where subscriptions align directly with consumption metrics for features like throughput or security modules.
License enforcement in Smart Licensing relies on device registration with CSSM, where unregistered or non-compliant devices enter evaluation or grace modes to maintain operations while prompting remediation. An initial 90-day evaluation period activates upon enabling licensed features, allowing full functionality without purchase; post-expiry, devices shift to EVAL EXPIRY mode, entering a grace period of 365 days during which features remain active but with syslog warnings and restricted new activations until reporting to CSSM resolves compliance. Legacy perpetual licenses, such as those on pre-Smart IOS platforms, do not require ongoing reporting and remain valid indefinitely post-activation.
Licensing tiers in IOS include evaluation for trial use, RTU for software-based activation that transitions from a 60-day evaluation to perpetual right upon acceptance, and permanent licenses for hardware-bound or long-term entitlements. In Smart Licensing environments, these tiers integrate with CSSM for automated conversion, where RTU and permanent licenses from older systems migrate to equivalent Smart entitlements via Device Led Conversion without service interruption. For hardware-specific implementations, such as the ISR 4000 series, license storage and performance enforcement leverage onboard HDD for service-intensive features, ensuring persistent data for compliance tracking in subscription scenarios.
These models govern access to IOS feature sets by tying entitlements to technology packages, such as security or performance boosters, without altering the underlying feature availability.

Variants

IOS XE

Cisco IOS XE is a modular operating system first released in 2009 with the Cisco ASR 1000 Series Aggregation Services Routers. The Release 3.1S in July 2010 introduced support for additional hardware, marking a significant evolution from the classic monolithic Cisco IOS architecture. It leverages a Linux kernel to host the control plane, enabling greater flexibility and isolation of processes, while the core IOS functionality runs within a containerized process known as IOSd to maintain backward compatibility with existing IOS commands and features. This distributed design allows multiple IOS XE instances to share management responsibilities across the device, supporting enhanced scalability for enterprise and service provider environments.
A primary distinction of IOS XE is its modular architecture, which separates the control plane from the data plane to improve reliability and performance. The data plane is handled by the Quantum Flow Processor (QFP), a specialized ASIC that processes packets independently of the CPU, enabling line-rate forwarding without interrupting control operations. This separation facilitates features like In-Service Software Upgrade (ISSU), which allows seamless software updates on redundant Route Processors with minimal packet loss, typically under 50 milliseconds, by synchronizing state between active and standby units before switchover. ISSU requires hardware redundancy, such as dual Route Processors in ASR 1000 chassis, and supports upgrades across compatible release trains while preserving network services.
IOS XE enhances network programmability through standards-based interfaces, including NETCONF for configuration management and gNMI for telemetry and modeling, which integrate with YANG data models to enable automated provisioning and monitoring. It also supports containerized applications via native Docker integration, allowing third-party apps to run in isolated environments on the Linux-based platform, such as on Catalyst 9000 switches starting with IOS XE 16.12.1. Recent releases, including the Cupertino 17.9.x train with updates as of September 2025, incorporate advancements like private 5G support for cellular backhaul and Wi-Fi 6E compatibility in wireless controllers, expanding deployment in hybrid enterprise networks.
Primarily deployed on Cisco Catalyst 9000 Series switches and ISR 4000 Series routers, IOS XE powers edge-to-core networking with unified management across wired and wireless domains. Migration from classic IOS involves upgrading to compatible hardware and using built-in tools like the install mode for package-based updates, which automate image validation, rollback, and configuration preservation during transitions to IOS XE environments.

IOS XR

Cisco IOS XR is a modular network operating system developed by Cisco Systems specifically for high-end carrier routers, emphasizing scalability, reliability, and service provider requirements. It was first announced on May 24, 2004, alongside the Carrier Routing System (CRS-1) platform, with the initial generally available release being version 2.0. IOS XR originally used a QNX-based microkernel for its distributed architecture, enabling process isolation and granular restarts.
Starting with Release 6.1.2 in 2016, it transitioned to a 64-bit Linux kernel for enhanced performance and compatibility on modern hardware. The architecture features distributed processes running in protected memory spaces, allowing independent restarts without affecting the entire system, and supports Software Maintenance Upgrades (SMUs) for targeted patching of specific components without full system reloads.
This design provides carrier-grade reliability, targeting 99.999% uptime through features like non-stop routing and process restartability. Key features include support for segment routing to simplify network paths and Ethernet VPN (EVPN) for scalable Layer 2/3 services.
Recent versions, such as 7.11.x released starting December 2023, introduce AI-driven telemetry for predictive analytics and anomaly detection using machine learning on streaming data.
IOS XR is deployed on platforms like the ASR 9000 series aggregation services routers and NCS 5500/8000 series for core and edge networks, supporting advanced management via gRPC for telemetry and model-driven interfaces using YANG data models.
Its versioning follows a train model similar to classic IOS, with major releases introducing new features every few years.

NX-OS

Cisco NX-OS is a data center-class operating system based on Linux, designed for Cisco Nexus switches and the Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI). First released in 2008, it provides modular architecture with support for virtualization, such as virtual device contexts (VDCs), and programmability features including Python scripting, NETCONF/YANG, and REST APIs. NX-OS emphasizes high performance for storage, compute, and fabric environments, with capabilities like VXLAN for overlay networks and integration with Cisco ACI for policy-driven automation. It diverges from traditional IOS in its multi-vendor protocol support and hitless upgrades for minimal downtime.

Security Considerations

Built-in Security Mechanisms

Cisco IOS incorporates several built-in access control mechanisms to manage user authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA). The AAA framework supports integration with external servers using protocols such as RADIUS and TACACS+, enabling centralized authentication and granular control over user privileges. TACACS+ provides separation of authentication, authorization, and accounting processes, allowing for more flexible policy enforcement compared to RADIUS, which combines them. Additionally, role-based CLI views restrict users to specific sets of commands and configurations, enhancing administrative security by limiting access to sensitive operations. Control Plane Policing (CoPP) further bolsters access controls by applying quality-of-service policies to filter and rate-limit traffic destined for the router's control plane, mitigating denial-of-service risks. For basic local authentication on console and VTY lines, a password can be configured directly on the line with the password command and enabled with the login command, prompting only for a password (no username required). If login local is used instead, authentication requires a local username and password from the configured database. Without a password or login configured, access may be denied or left unrestricted (not recommended). This simple method is often applied to Telnet access, though Telnet is insecure due to lack of encryption and SSH is preferred for remote management.
Encryption capabilities in Cisco IOS ensure secure data transmission and management access. IPSec VPNs provide robust site-to-site and remote access connectivity through protocols like ESP and AH, supporting both transport and tunnel modes for confidentiality and integrity. For device management, SSH version 2 offers encrypted remote sessions, replacing insecure Telnet, and includes support for public key authentication using RSA or DSA keys. Certificate-based authentication integrates with public key infrastructure (PKI) for mutual verification during sessions. Password storage employs hashing algorithms, including type 5 (MD5), type 8 (PBKDF2-SHA256), and type 9 (scrypt), with types 8 and 9 recommended for their resistance to brute-force attacks over the weaker type 5.
Key security features in Cisco IOS include zone-based firewalls and access control lists (ACLs) for traffic filtering. Zone-based firewalls segment interfaces into security zones, applying policy-based inspections and actions such as inspection, drop, or pass between zones to prevent unauthorized access. ACLs complement this by permitting or denying packets based on criteria like source/destination IP, ports, and protocols, often used in conjunction with firewalls for layered defense. Secure boot, introduced in IOS Release 15.0, verifies the integrity of the IOS image during startup to prevent execution of tampered or unauthorized software.
In 2025, Cisco enhanced IOS security through Trustworthy Solutions 2.0, incorporating hardware root-of-trust mechanisms to establish a secure boot chain from the hardware level and ensuring FIPS 140-2 compliance for cryptographic modules in government and regulated environments.

Known Vulnerabilities and Mitigations

Cisco IOS has faced several high-profile vulnerabilities throughout its history, with notable examples including a buffer overflow demonstrated at Black Hat in 2005 by researcher Michael Lynn, affecting versions 12.3 and 12.4, which allowed remote code execution through crafted packets targeting the IOS image loader. In 2017, CVE-2017-3881 exposed a critical flaw in the Cluster Management Protocol of Cisco IOS and IOS XE, enabling unauthenticated remote attackers to execute arbitrary code or cause device reloads via malformed Telnet options. More recently, in 2025, CVE-2025-20363 highlighted a remote code execution vulnerability in the Web Services feature of Cisco IOS XE Software, stemming from improper input validation that could allow authenticated attackers to escalate privileges.
Common security issues in Cisco IOS include buffer overflows, which have repeatedly enabled memory corruption and code injection, as seen in multiple advisories affecting packet processing components. Weak default configurations, such as Type 7 password encryptiona reversible Vigenre cipherexpose credentials to easy decryption using publicly available tools, compromising access controls. Additionally, denial-of-service (DoS) attacks via crafted packets have been prevalent, overwhelming resources like the CLI or SNMP subsystems, with examples including CVE-2025-20352, an exploited stack-based buffer overflow in IOS and IOS XE that led to device crashes. In 2025 alone, Cisco's Product Security Incident Response Team (PSIRT) addressed dozens of such vulnerabilities through bundled publications, underscoring the platform's exposure to evolving threats. As of November 2025, PSIRT confirmed active in-the-wild exploitation of vulnerabilities like CVE-2025-20352, with additional attack variants noted in interconnected products.
To mitigate these risks, Cisco recommends regular application of Software Maintenance Upgrades (SMUs), which deliver targeted patches without requiring full image upgrades, supporting both hot and cold patching modes in IOS XE. Features like Cisco Secure Boot verify image integrity during startup to prevent tampered software from loading, though vulnerabilities such as those in CVE-2025-20313 and CVE-2025-20314 have occasionally bypassed it via privilege escalation. Integration with Cisco Umbrella provides DNS-layer security to block malicious domains targeting IOS devices, enhancing threat visibility. Best practices include enforcing least privilege access via role-based CLI views, enabling comprehensive logging with syslog or NetFlow for anomaly detection, and avoiding deprecated features like Type 7 passwords in favor of stronger hashing with enable secret or Type 8/9 algorithms.
Recent trends reflect a shift toward zero-trust principles in Cisco IOS, emphasizing enhanced authentication and segmentation controls to assume breach and verify all access continuously. Cisco's PSIRT issues semiannual advisories, such as the September 2025 bundle covering 14 vulnerabilities, to facilitate proactive vulnerability scanning and patching, helping administrators maintain secure deployments.

References

Cisco Internetwork Operating System (Cisco IOS)

Understanding the Cisco IOS Software

Cisco IOS XE Past, Present, and Future

Cisco Internetworking Operating Systems (IOS)

Networking Software (IOS and NX-OS) - Cisco

https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/ios-nx-os-software/ios-xe/index.html

Cisco Catalyst SD-WAN Design Guide

Cisco IOS XE 17 - Release Notes

Cisco vs Juniper: Market Share in 2026 - CBT Nuggets

Cisco Prime Infrastructure to Cisco Catalyst Center Migration Guide

Upgrade and Install Cisco IOS Software Image

Cisco IOS Boot System Image - NetworkLessons.com

Inside the Invention of the Stanford Router That Inspired Cisco

The Real Origin of Cisco Systems - TC Rindfleisch

 The Transformative Operating System Called IOS - Cisco

Router Products Release Notes for Cisco IOS Release 10.0

 Start Here Cisco IOS Software Release Specifics for IPv6 Features

Cisco IOS Software Release 15.0(1)S

Software Defined Networking - Cisco

Cisco IOS Release 15.9(3)M12 - Routers

https://siliconangle.com/2025/11/03/cisco-launches-devices-software-aimed-bringing-ai-edge/

IOS (Cisco Systems): All releases, patches, maintenance and ...

ASR9000/XR: Migrating from IOS to IOS-XR a starting guide

 Developments in Cisco IOS Forensics - Black Hat

 Cisco IOS XE and ASIC Architecture - Cisco Live

 Operating Systems Basics IOS Architecture Overview

 Maintaining System Memory Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS ...

Buffer Tuning for all Cisco Routers

Use the Show Processes Command - Cisco

Warm Reload - Configuration Guides

Understand Software-forced Crashes - Cisco

Configuring Cisco IOS Intrusion Prevention System 

Cisco 4000 Family Integrated Services Router Data Sheet

Chapter: Using the Cisco IOS Command-Line Interface

Catalyst 3750 Switch Software Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS ...

Embedded Event Manager Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS Release ...

Cisco IOS Shell Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS Release 15S

Chapter: Using the Cisco IOS Web Browser User Interface

Cisco Configuration Professional for Catalyst (CCP-CATALYST ...

VPN Device Manager Client for Cisco IOS Software (XSM ...

SNMP Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17 - Cisco

Configure NETCONF/YANG for Cisco IOS XE 16.X Platforms

Cisco 1000 Series Software Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE ...

Configure SSH on Routers and Switches - Cisco

Cisco Catalyst Center 2.3.7 Data Sheet

IP Routing Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.x

IP Routing: RIP Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE Release 3SE ...

IP Routing: BGP Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE Gibraltar 16.10.x

 IPv6 Addressing and Basic Connectivity Configuration Guide, Cisco ...

Understand Express Forwarding - Cisco

IP Switching Cisco Express Forwarding Configuration Guide, Cisco ...

Configuring Route Leaking and Redistribution 

IP Routing Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.x

Understand Route Aggregation in BGP - Cisco

IP Routing Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.x - Policy-Based ...

IP Routing Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.x - Multi-VRF ...

Troubleshoot High CPU Caused by the BGP Scanner or Router ...

Active BGP entries (FIB) - BGP potaroo.net

Segment Routing Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17 - Cisco

Access and Edge Routers - Segment Routing over IPv6 [Cisco IOS ...

Layer 2 Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.13.x (Catalyst 9200 ...

VLAN Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS Release 15.2(7)Ex (Catalyst ...

Switch Speeds and Forwarding Methods (7.4) - Cisco Press

Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP) (802.3ad) for Gigabit ...

 Configuring HSRP, VRRP, and GLBP - Cisco

IP Multicast: PIM Configuration Guide - Cisco

Quality of Service (QoS) Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE Everest ...

Guide to Cisco IOS Release Naming

Cisco IOS and Cisco NX-OS Software Release Reference Guide

Cisco IOS Release 15.9(3)M11 - Routers

http://cfn.cloudapps.cisco.com/ITDIT/CFN/jsp/index.jsp

Products - End-of-Life Policy - Cisco

Product Field Notice Summary - Cisco

Software Lifecycle Support Statement - IOS XE - Cisco

Cisco IOS XE 17 - Support

Cisco Software Checker

End-of-Sale and End-of-Life Announcement for the Cisco 15.9(3)M ...

IP Services - Cisco

Cisco 1000 Series Integrated Services Routers Ordering Guide

Cisco Feature Navigator

Configuring the Cisco IOS Software Activation Feature

Cisco SD-WAN for a secure, future-ready workplace

Products IOS Cisco IOS Software Releases

Cisco Smart Licensing Guide for Cisco Enterprise Routing Platforms

Configuring a Cisco Right-To-Use License [Cisco ASR 1000 Series ...

What Is Perpetual Licensing vs. Subscription - Cisco

Cisco Licensing Hub & Smart Account Licensing Management

Configure Smart Licensing for IOS Enterprise Routing Platforms

 Migrate from Traditional Licensing to Smart Licensing - Cisco

Cisco Networking Subscription Data Sheet

Cisco Smart Licensing Guide for Cisco Enterprise Routing Platforms

Cisco Smart Licensing Guide for Cisco Enterprise Routing Platforms

Troubleshoot Smart Licensing on Catalyst Platforms - Cisco

Cisco IOS XR Smart Licensing

Release Notes for Cisco 4000 Series ISRs, Cisco IOS XE 17.16.x

Introduction - Release Notes

Model Driven Telemetry White Paper - Cisco

Troubleshoot Packet Drops on ASR 1000 Series Service Routers

 High Availability Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE Release 2

Programmability Command Reference, Cisco IOS XE Dublin 17.10.x

Application Hosting on the Cisco Catalyst 9000 Series Switches ...

Whats New in Cisco IOS XE Cupertino 17.9.x - Release Notes

Cisco 4000 Series ISRs Software Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS ...

 IP/MPLS High Availability Technologies - Cisco

Understand Cisco IOS XR Software Maintenance Updates (SMUs)

 Introduction to IOS-XR - Cisco Live

 Cisco Products Quick Reference Guide - Andover Consulting Group

IOS XR Data Sheet - Cisco

Telemetry Configuration Guide for Cisco 8000 Series Routers, IOS ...

Programmability Configuration Guide for Cisco ASR 9000 Series ...

Telemetry Configuration Guide for Cisco NCS 5500 Series Routers ...

IOS XR Release Taxonomy Bulletin - Cisco

Configure Basic AAA on an Access Server - Cisco

Compare TACACS + and RADIUS - Cisco

Role-Based CLI Access - Cisco Systems

Control Plane Policing - Cisco

Harden IOS Devices - Cisco

Security and VPN Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.x

 Security Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE Amsterdam 17.3.x ...

Security Configuration Guide: Zone-Based Policy Firewall - Cisco

Understand the Zone-Based Policy Firewall Design - Cisco

 Trustworthy Systems Guide - Cisco

Furor over Cisco IOS router exploit erupts at Black Hat - Network World

Cisco Security Advisory

Cisco Security Advisories

Cisco IOS and IOS XE Software SNMP Denial of Service and ...

September 2025 Semiannual Cisco IOS and IOS XE Software ...

System Management Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.x

Cisco IOS XE Software Secure Boot Bypass Vulnerabilities

Understand Cisco IOS Password Encryption

User Security Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS Release 15MT

Reset Router to Factory Defaults - Cisco

Configure Telnet Password on a Router to Avoid Error Message

User Security Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE Gibraltar 16.12.x - Configuring Security with Passwords, Privileges, and Logins

Security Configuration Guide, Cisco IOS XE 17.16.x - Configuring Authentication
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion