Clique problem Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Clique problem
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 In graph theory, the clique problem, often referred to as the maximum clique problem, is the computational task of determining whether an undirected graph contains a cliquea subset of vertices such that every pair of distinct vertices is adjacent via an edgeof size at least a given integer kkk. This decision version asks for the existence of a complete subgraph isomorphic to the complete graph KkK_kKk, while the optimization variant seeks the largest such clique in the graph. The problem is defined on finite, simple undirected graphs without self-loops or multiple edges between vertices.
The clique problem holds a central place in computational complexity theory, as its decision version was proven NP-complete by Richard Karp in 1972 through a polynomial-time reduction from the satisfiability problem (SAT). This places it among the first 21 problems Karp identified as NP-complete, highlighting its intractability for general graphs, where no known polynomial-time algorithm exists unless P = NP. The optimization version is NP-hard, and exact solutions typically require exponential-time algorithms, such as branch-and-bound methods or dynamic programming approaches that enumerate potential cliques. Approximation algorithms exist but cannot guarantee solutions within a constant factor better than n1n^{1-\epsilon}n1 for any >0\epsilon > 0>0 in polynomial time, unless P = NP.
Due to its hardness, practical solutions for the clique problem often rely on heuristics, metaheuristics like genetic algorithms or tabu search, and exact solvers tailored to specific graph classes, such as perfect graphs where the clique number equals the chromatic number of the complement graph. The problem's complement is the independent set problem, and both are duals in many graph optimization contexts. Variants include the maximum clique enumeration problem, which identifies all maximum-sized cliques, and the clique cover problem, which partitions vertices into the minimum number of cliques.
The clique problem finds diverse applications across fields, modeling scenarios where fully interconnected groups are sought. In bioinformatics, it aids in protein structure prediction by identifying densely connected residue clusters and analyzing metabolic or gene regulatory networks to detect functional modules. In social network analysis, cliques represent tightly knit communities or fault-tolerant clusters in communication graphs. Other uses include chemoinformatics for molecular similarity searches, scheduling problems in operations research, and fault diagnosis in electronics, where cliques correspond to minimal sets of interacting components.

Definitions

Basic concepts

In graph theory, an undirected simple graph G=(V,E)G = (V, E)G=(V,E) consists of a finite set VVV of vertices and a set EEE of edges, where each edge is an unordered pair of distinct vertices from VVV, with no multiple edges between the same pair of vertices and no loops incident to a single vertex. A clique in such a graph GGG is a subset of vertices where every pair of distinct vertices is connected by an edge, equivalently forming a complete subgraph induced by those vertices. A kkk-clique refers specifically to a clique containing exactly kkk vertices.
A clique is maximal if it is not properly contained in any larger clique, meaning no additional vertex from VVV can be added while preserving the complete subgraph property. In contrast, a maximum clique is a clique of largest possible size in GGG, and the clique number (G)\omega(G)(G) denotes this maximum size. Cliques relate to independent sets through the graph complement: the complement graph G\overline{G}G has the same vertex set VVV but edges between pairs of vertices that are non-adjacent in GGG, and a set of vertices forms a clique in GGG if and only if it forms an independent set in G\overline{G}G, where an independent set is a subset of vertices with no edges between them.
The maximum clique problem is formally defined as follows: given an undirected simple graph G=(V,E)G = (V, E)G=(V,E), find a clique in GGG of maximum cardinality, or equivalently, compute (G)\omega(G)(G).

Problem variants

The decision version of the clique problem, known as the k-clique problem, asks whether an undirected graph G = (V, E) contains a clique of size at least k. The input consists of the graph G and a positive integer k, and the output is "yes" if such a clique exists and "no" otherwise.
The optimization version, called the maximum clique problem, seeks to identify the largest clique in the graph G, either by determining its size (the clique number (G)) or by finding the actual vertex set forming that clique. A clique is defined as a subset of vertices where every pair is adjacent, and the objective is to maximize the cardinality of this subset.
The search version of the clique problem requires explicitly outputting the vertices of a maximum clique or a k-clique if one exists in the graph G. This formulation extends the decision version by demanding a constructive solution rather than a mere yes/no answer.
A related variant is the clique cover problem, specifically the vertex clique cover, which aims to find the minimum number of cliques whose union covers all vertices of the graph G. Each vertex must belong to at least one clique in the cover, and the goal is to minimize the number of such cliques. The clique cover number equals the chromatic number of the complement graph.
The clique problem is closely related to the independent set problem through the complement graph: a clique in G corresponds exactly to an independent set (a set of vertices with no edges between them) in the complement graph , where edges exist between non-adjacent vertices of G. Thus, the maximum clique in G is equivalent to the maximum independent set in .
The decision and search versions of the clique problem are equivalent via self-reducibility, meaning the search version can be solved in polynomial time using an oracle for the decision version. To find a k-clique, iteratively query the decision oracle on subgraphs obtained by removing vertices until a minimal set inducing a k-clique is isolated, ensuring the process runs in time polynomial in the input size assuming the oracle is polynomial-time.

Background

Historical development

The study of cliques in graph theory traces its origins to early 20th-century work on combinatorial structures. In 1930, Frank P. Ramsey published a foundational result in his paper "On a Problem of Formal Logic," demonstrating that sufficiently large structures inevitably contain monochromatic cliques under edge colorings, laying groundwork for understanding guaranteed clique existence in dense graphs. This theorem, which has a natural graph-theoretic interpretation involving monochromatic cliques in edge-colored complete graphs, highlighted cliques as key objects in extremal combinatorics. Building on these ideas, Pl Turn's 1941 theorem addressed the maximum number of edges in graphs avoiding cliques of a given size, introducing Turn graphs as extremal constructions and initiating systematic analysis of clique-free graphs. The term 'clique' was introduced to graph theory by R. Duncan Luce and Albert D. Perry in 1949, who used it to describe complete subgraphs in their analysis of social networks.
The mid-20th century saw further advancements in quantifying cliques. In 1965, J.W. Moon and L. Moser established tight bounds on the maximum number of maximal cliques in an n-vertex graph, proving it is at most 3^{n/3}, which provided critical insights into clique enumeration complexity. The clique problem was formally recognized as a computational challenge in 1972 when Richard M. Karp included it in his seminal list of 21 NP-complete problems, showing its reducibility from other hard problems like 3-SAT and emphasizing its role in complexity theory. This classification was solidified in 1979 by Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson's influential textbook "Computers and Intractability," which cataloged the clique problem as NP-complete and discussed its implications for algorithm design.
Algorithmic milestones emerged in the 1970s, with Coen Bron and Joep Kerbosch introducing in 1973 a backtracking procedure for enumerating all maximal cliques, which remains a benchmark for exact enumeration due to its efficiency on sparse graphs. The 1990s marked the rise of parameterized complexity, where Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows developed a framework analyzing clique problems with respect to parameters like clique size k, classifying k-clique as W-complete and distinguishing tractable cases. Recent progress includes hybrid branching approaches for maximal clique enumeration, as proposed in 2024, enhancing scalability for large graphs in practical solvers.

Applications

In social network analysis, cliques represent tightly knit groups or communities where every member is connected to every other, such as friend circles in platforms like Facebook, enabling the detection of cohesive subgroups for influence maximization or recommendation systems. For instance, enumerating maximal cliques in large-scale social graphs helps identify collaborative teams or event participants by revealing dense substructures that reflect strong interpersonal ties.
In bioinformatics, finding cliques in protein-protein interaction networks identifies functional modules or protein complexes, where a clique corresponds to a set of proteins that physically interact with each other, aiding in the prediction of biological pathways and drug targets. Algorithms that detect dense cliques, often extended to near-cliques via transitive closures, have been applied to sparse interaction data to uncover overlapping complexes in yeast and human networks.
In VLSI design, the maximum clique problem arises in channel routing, where the horizontal net compatibility graph's clique cover determines the minimum number of tracks needed to route nets without overlaps, optimizing chip layout efficiency. Similarly, in register allocation, the interference graph's maximum clique size provides a lower bound on the minimum registers required, as mutually interfering variables cannot share a register, influencing compiler optimizations for high-performance circuits.
In coding theory, cliques in the Johnson graph correspond to constant-weight binary codes, where the size of the maximum clique yields upper bounds on the maximum number of codewords with fixed weight and minimum distance, directly impacting the design of error-correcting codes for reliable data transmission. This connection has led to heuristic constructions using clique-finding techniques to generate optimal or near-optimal constant-weight codes for applications like combinatorial designs.
In scheduling, the clique number of a task conflict graph serves as a lower bound on the minimum number of processors required in multiprocessor systems, as it represents the maximum set of mutually incompatible tasks that cannot run concurrently, guiding resource allocation in parallel computing environments.
Recent applications include clique interdiction in network security, where removing a limited number of vertices minimizes the largest remaining clique to disrupt tightly connected threat groups, such as terrorist cells in communication networks, with formulations showing NP-hardness and branch-and-bound solutions. Additionally, in 2020s data mining, summarization of maximal cliques compresses the output of enumeration algorithms by merging overlapping cliques into representative patterns, facilitating scalable analysis in large graphs for anomaly detection and pattern discovery.

Algorithms

Exact algorithms for maximum cliques

Exact algorithms for the maximum clique problem aim to compute the largest clique in a graph by exhaustively searching the solution space while employing pruning strategies to eliminate unpromising branches. Branch-and-bound techniques form the cornerstone of these methods, where the search tree is constructed by sequentially adding vertices to a partial clique, ensuring each added vertex is adjacent to all previous ones in the clique. To prune effectively, upper bounds on the possible clique size in subproblems are computed, often using the size of the candidate vertex set or more sophisticated estimates like the minimum number of colors needed in a greedy coloring of the induced subgraph on remaining vertices.
A classic implementation is the MCQ algorithm developed by Carraghan and Pardalos in 1990, which orders vertices in decreasing order of degree and applies a depth-first branch-and-bound search. In MCQ, bit-parallelism is utilized to represent neighborhoods efficiently, allowing rapid intersection operations during clique extension; the algorithm processes vertices from one end of the ordering, updating the maximum clique size whenever a larger one is found. This simple yet effective approach has served as a baseline for subsequent improvements, demonstrating strong performance on sparse graphs.
Dynamic programming over subsets provides an alternative exact method suitable for small graphs, adapting principles similar to the Held-Karp algorithm for the traveling salesman problem. In this framework, states represent subsets of vertices, and the recurrence computes the maximum clique size by considering whether a subset induces a clique, with transitions based on adding vertices adjacent to the current subset; verification of clique status requires checking all pairs, leading to a time complexity of O(2^n n^2) in the naive form, though optimizations via adjacency bitsets can reduce practical constants. Inclusion-exclusion principles can further refine this by avoiding redundant subset checks, but the approach remains exponential and is typically limited to graphs with up to around 40 vertices.
Recent advancements include hybrid solvers that integrate metaheuristics like tabu search with exact branching to enhance exploration and pruning. For instance, a 2020 method embeds an exact branch-and-bound solver within a tabu search framework to solve subproblems arising from heuristic moves, improving solution quality on challenging instances through diversified searches followed by provable optimality checks. Improvements in pruning often involve graph reductions, such as vertex elimination schemes that remove vertices with degree less than the current best clique size minus one or dominated vertices whose neighborhoods are subsets of others, thereby shrinking the search space before branching.
Theoretically, the best-known exact algorithms achieve time complexities of O(1.20^n), as in optimized branch-and-bound variants with advanced reduction rules and bounding functions. In practice, these methods excel on DIMACS benchmark instances, where MCQ and its derivatives solve many graphs with hundreds of vertices in seconds, though hard instances like brock400_1 remain challenging, requiring hours or more on modern hardware.
A simple backtracking algorithm for the maximum clique can be outlined as follows, assuming vertices are ordered $ v_1, v_2, \dots, v_n $ in decreasing degree:
function MaxClique(current_clique, candidate_set, best_clique):
 if |candidate_set| + |current_clique| <= |best_clique|:
 return // Prune
 if |current_clique| > |best_clique|:
 best_clique = current_clique
 for each v in candidate_set (in order):
 new_candidates = candidate_set after v N(v) // Intersect with neighbors
 MaxClique(current_clique {v}, new_candidates, best_clique)
This pseudocode initializes with an empty clique and full vertex set, pruning via a basic upper bound and updating the global best; enhancements add tighter bounds and reductions for efficiency.

Enumeration of maximal cliques

The enumeration of maximal cliques involves listing all subsets of vertices that induce complete subgraphs and cannot be extended by adding another vertex while preserving completeness. A seminal approach is the BronKerbosch algorithm, introduced in 1973, which employs a recursive backtracking procedure to systematically explore potential cliques without duplicates. The algorithm maintains three sets: R (the current clique), P (vertices adjacent to all in R that could extend it), and X (vertices already excluded). In its basic form without pivoting, it reports R as maximal when both P and X are empty, then recursively branches on vertices in P to build larger candidates, updating the sets by intersections with neighborhoods.
To enhance efficiency, the original algorithm incorporates pivoting: at each step, a pivot vertex u is selected from P X to minimize branching, as only vertices in P excluding the neighborhood N(u) need recursion, since others will be covered in the pivot's branch. This reduces the worst-case time from exponential in n (number of vertices) to near-optimal for sparse graphs. Pseudocode for the pivoting version is as follows:
procedure BronKerbosch(R, P, X)
 if P = and X = then
 report R as a maximal clique
 choose pivot u P X
 for each v P \ N(u) do
 BronKerbosch(R {v}, P N(v), X N(v))
 P := P \ {v}
 X := X {v}
A common optimization preprocesses the graph with a degeneracy ordering, where vertices are ordered v_1, ..., v_n such that each v_i has at most d (the degeneracy) neighbors later in the order; the algorithm then processes in reverse order, restricting candidates to subsequent vertices, which bounds branching and improves practical performance on sparse graphs.
Output-sensitive algorithms measure time relative to the number of maximal cliques output, denoted (G). A fundamental bound is that (G) 3^{n/3} for any n-vertex graph G, achieved by the Turn graph T(n,2) (the complete bipartite graph K_{n/3,2n/3}), with matching upper and lower bounds established in 1965; thus, enumeration algorithms aim for O(3^{n/3} poly(n)) total time. Recent improvements in the 2020s, such as hybrid branching methods, achieve better practical delays on large real-world graphs by combining pivoting with graph reductions, though worst-case bounds remain tied to the MoonMoser limit.
The reverse search technique provides an alternative framework for implicit enumeration, avoiding explicit storage of all cliques and ensuring no duplicates via a parent-child tree structure over the output set. Introduced in 1996 for general combinatorial enumeration, it applies to maximal cliques by defining a local search from each clique to a unique parent (e.g., via removing a vertex with minimal degree), enabling traversal in constant amortized time per output after an initial setup. This method underpins efficient implementations for large outputs, such as in matrix-multiplication-based algorithms achieving O(M(n)) delay per clique, where M(n) is the matrix multiplication time.
Enumeration of maximal cliques overlaps with frequent itemset mining in data mining, where transactions form a bipartite graph and maximal frequent itemsets correspond to maximal bicliques (or cliques in the one-sided projection); algorithms like BronKerbosch variants are adapted for this, reducing the need to store all subsets. For handling large outputs (potentially exponential), streaming techniques process cliques on-the-fly without full storage, using bounded memory and polynomial delay to output them sequentially, as in reverse search or partition-based methods.
In terms of complexity, maximal clique enumeration is worst-case exponential due to the 3^{n/3} output size, but polynomial-delay algorithms exist that spend O(poly(n)) time per clique, such as those using fast matrix multiplication or lexicographic ordering; for example, one variant lists them with O(n^) delay, where < 2.373 is the matrix exponent. In sparse graphs or bounded degeneracy, delays can be near-linear per output.

Algorithms for special graph classes

In graphs belonging to certain special classes with structural restrictions, the maximum clique problem can be solved exactly in polynomial time, in contrast to the general case where it is NP-hard. These classes often exhibit properties like perfectness or bounded treewidth that allow exploitation of the graph structure for efficient algorithms. Seminal results leverage optimization techniques or graph decompositions to compute the clique number (G) or identify a maximum clique directly.
For perfect graphs, where the clique number equals the chromatic number for every induced subgraph, the maximum clique can be computed in polynomial time using the ellipsoid method applied to the separation problem for the stable set polytope. This approach, developed by Grtschel, Lovsz, and Schrijver, yields an algorithm running in time polynomial in the input size, specifically O(n^{6.5}) for n-vertex graphs based on the ellipsoid method's complexity at the time. Alternatively, semidefinite programming formulations, building on the same theoretical foundation, provide practical implementations for computing (G) in perfect graphs, confirming the equality (G) = (G) without explicit enumeration.
Chordal graphs, a subclass of perfect graphs characterized by the absence of induced cycles of length four or more, admit linear-time algorithms for finding a maximum clique. These rely on a perfect elimination ordering (PEO), which can be obtained via maximum cardinality search in O(n + m) time, where n is the number of vertices and m the number of edges. Gavril's algorithm processes vertices in reverse PEO order, maintaining the neighborhood intersection to identify the largest clique containing each vertex, achieving overall O(n + m) time complexity. Clique trees, junction trees representing the maximal cliques and their intersections, further enable linear-time computation by traversing the tree structure to aggregate clique sizes.
Interval graphs, which represent intersections of intervals on a line and are a subclass of chordal graphs, support a specialized O(n log n) greedy algorithm for the maximum clique. Given interval representations, sort the 2n endpoints and perform a sweep-line traversal: increment a counter for left endpoints and decrement for right endpoints, tracking the maximum overlap, which equals (G). This directly identifies the size and a point of maximum overlap to extract the clique, with the sorting step dominating the time. As interval graphs are chordal, the general linear-time PEO method also applies if no representation is provided, but the endpoint-based approach is more direct.
In bipartite graphs, the maximum clique size is at most 2, as no odd cycles exist, making the problem trivial: (G) = 2 if the graph has at least one edge, and 1 otherwise, detectable in O(1) time after checking for edges or in O(m) for confirmation. No dedicated algorithm is needed beyond basic connectivity checks.
For planar graphs, no polynomial-time algorithm is known for computing the maximum clique, as the problem remains NP-hard even in this restricted class. However, for fixed k, detecting or finding a k-clique can be done in linear time O(n) using color-coding techniques adapted to planar structure. Alon, Yuster, and Zwick's method colors vertices randomly with k colors and searches for a colorful K_k subgraph, derandomizable via dynamic programming on the color classes; in planar graphs, the bounded degree and separator properties yield O(n) expected time for fixed k.
Recent characterizations of clique-sparse graph classes, where the number of maximal cliques is O(n^c) for constant c, enable faster enumeration of all maximal cliques in subexponential time, improving over general exponential algorithms. Defined via forbidden induced subgraphs, these classes include graphs with bounded clique-tree width or sparsity in clique overlaps, allowing output-sensitive algorithms that run in time polynomial in n and the number of cliques output.

Approximation and heuristics

The maximum clique problem lacks polynomial-time approximation schemes, motivating the development of heuristics and approximation algorithms that deliver high-quality solutions efficiently on general graphs. These methods are particularly valuable for large-scale instances where exact algorithms falter due to exponential time complexity. Greedy heuristics provide simple, fast baselines, while metaheuristics explore broader solution spaces; approximation algorithms offer theoretical guarantees, albeit weak ones given the problem's inapproximability. Practical implementations often integrate these with modern techniques like machine learning for enhanced performance on benchmarks such as DIMACS graphs.
Greedy heuristics construct cliques incrementally by prioritizing vertices likely to extend the current set. A standard sequential greedy approach begins with a single vertex and repeatedly adds the neighbor with the highest degree within the induced subgraph of remaining candidates, terminating when no additions are possible; this often yields a large clique quickly but may trap in local optima. Local search variants improve upon this by permitting swaps or deletions of vertices in the current clique to explore nearby solutions, with randomized restarts to diversify initializations and boost solution quality. For instance, adaptive randomized greedy methods adjust selection probabilities based on prior iterations, achieving empirical ratios near optimal on sparse graphs. 
Metaheuristics extend greedy and local search by incorporating global optimization strategies to escape local maxima. Genetic algorithms represent cliques as bitstrings or vertex sets, evolving populations through selection, crossover (e.g., combining subsets of parent cliques), and mutation (random vertex flips), with fitness measured by clique size; seminal implementations demonstrate robustness on random and structured graphs. Tabu search builds on local search by maintaining a tabu list of prohibited moves to prevent cycling, iteratively perturbing the current clique while respecting short-term memory; a hybrid tabu search incorporating exact solvers for subproblems has shown superior runtime on DIMACS instances compared to pure heuristics. Recent 2024 hybrids, such as elite genetic algorithms fused with tabu search, outperform standalone metaheuristics on benchmark suites by balancing exploration and intensification. 
Approximation algorithms provide worst-case guarantees, though limited by hardness results. A basic greedy coloring-based method approximates the maximum clique within a factor of $ n / \omega(G) $, where $ n $ is the graph order and $ \omega(G) $ the optimum, by selecting vertices from color classes in a heuristic coloring; this ratio, while polynomial, degrades on dense graphs. Semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxations offer improved empirical approximations by formulating the clique as a quadratic program over the unit sphere, relaxing integrality to a convex semidefinite cone solvable via interior-point methods; rounding the SDP solution yields lower bounds competitive with greedy on moderate instances, though scalability limits their use. 
Practical tools leverage branch-and-bound (BnB) frameworks with heuristic pruning for near-exact results in feasible time. The BBMC algorithm uses bitstring representations for efficient neighborhood checks and coloring bounds to prune search trees, excelling on sparse DIMACS graphs; recent variants integrate machine learning, such as MCQD-ML, which applies dynamic neural networks to predict and prune unpromising branches based on subgraph features. Unsupervised ML for vertex ordering further accelerates BnB by prioritizing high-potential nodes, reducing explored nodes by up to 50% on hard benchmarks. 
Empirical evaluations on DIMACS benchmarks highlight the efficacy of these approaches, with metaheuristics like dynamic local search achieving approximation ratios of 0.950.99 (i.e., within 15% of optimal) on challenging instances such as $ c-fat200-5 $ and $ brock400_2 $, often in seconds versus hours for exact methods. No constant-factor approximation algorithm exists unless P=NP, underscoring the heuristic nature of these solutions. 

Complexity

NP-completeness

The decision version of the clique problemdetermining whether an undirected graph G=(V,E)G = (V, E)G=(V,E) contains a clique of size at least kkkis in NP. A certificate consists of a subset SVS \subseteq VSV with S=k|S| = kS=k, which can be verified in polynomial time by checking that every pair of vertices in SSS is adjacent in GGG, requiring O(k2)O(k^2)O(k2) edge queries.
The problem is NP-hard, as established by a polynomial-time many-one reduction from the vertex cover problem, which is known to be NP-complete. In Richard Karp's seminal 1972 paper, the reduction constructs the complement graph GC=(V,EC)G_C = (V, E_C)GC=(V,EC), where EC={(u,v)u,vV,(u,v)E}E_C = \{(u, v) \mid u, v \in V, (u, v) \notin E\}EC={(u,v)u,vV,(u,v)/E}, and sets the parameter l=Vk=nkl = |V| - k = n - kl=Vk=nk. This construction can be computed in O(n2)O(n^2)O(n2) time by enumerating all possible pairs and including those absent from EEE. The reduction preserves yes-instances: GGG has a clique of size kkk if and only if GCG_CGC has a vertex cover of size lll. To see this, suppose GGG has a clique KKK with K=k|K| = kK=k; then no edges exist between vertices in KKK in GCG_CGC, so every edge in ECE_CEC must incident to at least one vertex in VKV \setminus KVK, making VKV \setminus KVK a vertex cover of size nkn - knk in GCG_CGC. Conversely, if GCG_CGC has a vertex cover UUU of size nkn - knk, then VUV \setminus UVU induces no edges in GCG_CGC (hence a clique in GGG) of size kkk. Since vertex cover reduces to clique in polynomial time and clique is in NP, clique is NP-complete.
An equivalent NP-hardness proof follows from reducing the independent set problem (also NP-complete) to clique via the graph complement, as a clique in GGG corresponds to an independent set in GCG_CGC. Vertex cover itself reduces from 3-SAT, but the direct link via complement establishes the hardness chain.
The NP-completeness of clique implies significant theoretical and practical consequences. If P = NP, then clique (and all NP problems) would be solvable in polynomial time on a deterministic Turing machine, collapsing the complexity classes. In practice, the intractability for large nnn (e.g., graphs with thousands of vertices) necessitates exponential-time algorithms or approximations, as no subexponential deterministic algorithm is known unless the exponential time hypothesis fails.
The complementary decision problemwhether GGG has no clique of size at least kkkis co-NP-complete. A certificate for this would be a proof that the maximum clique size is less than kkk, verifiable in polynomial time if provided (e.g., via a maximum clique enumeration), but its hardness follows from the NP-completeness of clique, as the languages are complements.

Parameterized and fixed-parameter complexity

In parameterized complexity theory, a parameterized problem is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) if there exists an algorithm solving it in time f(k)ncf(k) \cdot n^cf(k)nc, where nnn is the input size, kkk is the parameter, fff is a computable function depending only on kkk, and ccc is a constant independent of kkk. The kkk-Clique problem, which asks whether a graph contains a clique of size kkk parameterized by kkk, is a canonical example in this framework. Unlike its classical NP-hardness, parameterization by solution size kkk allows for efficient algorithms when kkk is small.
The kkk-Clique problem is FPT, with the seminal color-coding technique providing a randomized algorithm running in 2O(k)nO(1)2^{O(k)} n^{O(1)}2O(k)nO(1) time. This method involves randomly coloring the vertices with kkk colors and searching for a colorful clique (one vertex per color) using dynamic programming over subsets of colors, with derandomization possible via universal hashing at a minor efficiency cost. Subsequent deterministic improvements maintain the 2O(k)nO(1)2^{O(k)} n^{O(1)}2O(k)nO(1) bound while enhancing practicality. While these FPT algorithms are theoretically efficient for fixed kkk, practical implementations often favor faster but parameter-dependent approaches for moderate kkk.
Combinatorial algorithms avoiding fast matrix multiplication achieve times like nk/logk1nn^k / \log^{k-1} nnk/logk1n, improving on brute-force nkn^knk. Algorithms leveraging fast matrix multiplication yield even better bounds, such as O(nk/3)O(n^{\omega k / 3})O(nk/3) where 2.37155\omega \approx 2.371552.37155 is the matrix multiplication exponent, or refined variants approaching nO(k/logk)n^{O(k / \log k)}nO(k/logk) through rectangular multiplication techniques. These remain in XP (solvable in nf(k)n^{f(k)}nf(k) time) rather than FPT, as the exponent grows with kkk, but they outperform FPT methods empirically for small kkk.
Although kkk-Clique is FPT, certain generalizations exhibit fixed-parameter intractability. For instance, the Multicolored kkk-Clique problem, where vertices are pre-colored with kkk colors and a rainbow clique (one vertex per color) is sought, is W-complete, implying it is unlikely to admit an FPT algorithm assuming FPT \neq= W. The standard kkk-Clique contrasts this by residing firmly in FPT. Broader classes like XP encompass problems solvable in nf(k)n^{f(k)}nf(k) time, including kkk-Clique via enumeration, but under standard complexity assumptions (e.g., FPT \neq= W), many related problems lack FPT algorithms despite XP membership.
Recent advancements extend parameterized tractability to restricted graph classes. For HHH-minor-free graphs, where HHH is a fixed minor, structural decomposition theorems enable subexponential FPT algorithms for kkk-Clique, running in 2O(klogk)nO(1)2^{O(\sqrt{k} \log k)} n^{O(1)}2O(klogk)nO(1) time when kkk is small relative to the exclusion bound. In 2024, robust contraction decompositions for HHH-minor-free graphs further refined these, yielding improved parameters for clique detection in sparse or bounded-expansion settings.

Approximation hardness

The approximation hardness of the maximum clique problem refers to the theoretical barriers preventing efficient algorithms from achieving good approximation ratios for the size of the largest clique in a graph. Early results leveraging probabilistically checkable proofs (PCPs) established strong inapproximability. Specifically, Arora and Safra showed that, unless NP ZPP, there is no polynomial-time algorithm approximating the maximum clique within a factor of $ n^{1-\epsilon} $ for some constant $ \epsilon > 0 $. This result stems from a reduction using interactive proofs and the PCP framework, highlighting the inherent difficulty even for slightly sublinear factors.
Subsequent work strengthened these bounds. Hstad proved that for every $ \epsilon > 0 $, approximating the maximum clique within $ n^{1-\epsilon} $ is NP-hard, assuming P NP. This optimal inapproximability (up to the trivial $ n $-factor) arises from tailored reductions from 3-SAT instances, incorporating long-code tests to amplify gaps in satisfiability to near-linear gaps in clique size. Further advancements using label-cover problems, as in Feige's analysis, demonstrated that no polynomial-time approximation better than $ n^{1 - o(1)} $ exists unless NP DTIME($ n^{O(\log \log n)} $). Zuckerman extended these insights by derandomizing prior constructions with linear-degree extractors, yielding that for every $ \epsilon > 0 $, there is no $ n / (\log n)^{\epsilon} approximationunlessNPDTIME(-approximation unless NP DTIME(approximationunlessNPDTIME( n (\log \log n)^{O(1)} / \log n $).
These results have profound implications for heuristic and approximation algorithm design. They establish that any polynomial-time method cannot guarantee better than nearly linear ratios, setting realistic expectations for practical solvers, which often target $ O(n / \polylog n) $ performance on sparse or structured graphs. In the 2020s, ongoing research links these hardness bounds to the Unique Games Conjecture (UGC), suggesting that assuming UGC could yield even tighter inapproximability thresholds, potentially closing gaps between known algorithms and theoretical limits for clique-related problems.

Other lower bounds

In circuit complexity, the clique problem exhibits significant hardness for monotone computations. Razborov demonstrated that any monotone circuit computing the clique function requires superpolynomial size, specifically exp((n1/3))\exp(\Omega(n^{1/3}))exp((n1/3)) for detecting cliques of size (n2/3)\Theta(n^{2/3})(n2/3) in nnn-vertex graphs. This bound was strengthened by Alon and Boppana to exp((n1/3log2n/loglogn))\exp(\Omega(n^{1/3} \log^2 n / \log \log n))exp((n1/3log2n/loglogn)). These results imply that the problem is not solvable by polynomial-size monotone circuits, with implications for parallel computation models; for instance, the monotone version separates monotone NC from P, as monotone NC circuits correspond to bounded-depth monotone circuits of polynomial size.
In decision tree models, lower bounds on query complexity highlight the challenges of accessing graph edges to detect cliques. For kkk-clique detection, particularly in the context of average-case analysis or bounded-depth circuits approximating decision trees, Rossman established an (nk/4)\Omega(n^{k/4})(nk/4) lower bound on the size for constant-depth circuits solving kkk-clique on random graphs, which extends to query-like models where edge probes simulate tree branches. In the sparse graph model, testing for triangles requires (m)\Omega(\sqrt{m})(m) edge queries, where mmm is the number of edges, establishing a tight bound in property testing frameworks for graphs far from triangle-free.
Time-space tradeoffs for clique detection leverage communication complexity to derive lower bounds on resource usage. For the CLIQUE-GAP problemdistinguishing graphs with a large clique from those withoutnew bounds using graph norms show that any deterministic streaming algorithm requires space (n1/2)\Omega(n^{1/2})(n1/2) in the worst case, derived from (n)\Omega(\sqrt{n})(n) communication lower bounds in multiparty protocols. These tradeoffs imply that algorithms balancing time and space cannot achieve sublinear space without exponential time increases, as communication barriers prevent efficient coordination in distributed or memory-constrained settings.
In quantum complexity, Grover's algorithm provides a quadratic speedup for unstructured search problems, including clique detection. By formulating maximum clique as a search over vertex subsets, a quantum implementation achieves O(2n/2)O(2^{n/2})O(2n/2) time complexity compared to the classical O(2n)O(2^n)O(2n), though exact solutions remain exponential. Recent efforts in the 2020s explore adiabatic quantum approaches; for instance, a 2024 parameter-independent algorithm using Seidel continuous-time quantum walks as a Hamiltonian solves maximum clique on random graphs of order up to 100 with accuracy converging to theoretical maxima and time complexity under O(n2)O(n^2)O(n2), outperforming classical simulated adiabatic methods by identifying larger cliques (e.g., size 14.5 vs. 13.75 on 100-vertex dense graphs).
Geometric lower bounds address inapproximability in Euclidean spaces, where cliques correspond to sets of points within fixed diameter. In dimension d=(logn)d = \Theta(\log n)d=(logn), approximating the largest such set (equivalent to maximum clique in unit disk graphs) within factors (95/94,4/3)(95/94 - \epsilon, \sqrt{4/3} - \epsilon)(95/94,4/3) is NP-hard for any >0\epsilon > 0>0, unless P = NP. This hardness persists in high dimensions, contrasting with polynomial-time solvability in fixed low dimensions like 2D, and underscores the computational barriers for geometric graph classes.

References

 Reducibility among Combinatorial Problems

(PDF) The Maximum Clique Problem - ResearchGate

The maximum clique enumeration problem: algorithms, applications ...

 Graph Search

 Chapter 12. Stable Sets and Cliques

 1 Cliques and Independent Sets Definition 1 A set of vertices is ...

 Fast Algorithms for the Maximum Clique Problem on Massive ... - cucis

 A review on algorithms for maximum clique problems

 CSC 373 Lecture # 11 Instructor: Milad Eftekhar Self-reducibility

Effective Data Reduction for the Vertex Clique Cover Problem

14. Some Graph Theory - MIT Mathematics

 ON A PBOBLEM OF FOKMAL LOGIC This paper is primarily ...

P. Turn, On an Extremal Problem in Graph Theory, Matematikai ...

 On cliques in graphs - User Web Pages

 REDUCIBILITY AMONG COMBINATORIAL PROBLEMS

Algorithm 457: finding all cliques of an undirected graph

 Maximal Clique Enumeration with Hybrid Branching and ... - arXiv

Parallel Maximum Clique Algorithms with Applications to Network ...

Predicting interactions in protein networks by completing defective ...

Finding cliques in protein interaction networks via transitive closure ...

 A Review on Channel Routing On VLSI Physical Design

 Register Allocation Via Clique Separators

 Maximal Cliques in Graphs and Some New Upper Bounds for ...

 Heuristic Construction of Constant Weight Binary Codes - IDSIA

Finding a Maximum Clique in an Arbitrary Graph - SIAM.org

The maximum clique interdiction problem - ScienceDirect.com

(PDF) Mining Maximal Clique Summary with Effective Sampling

 Exact Algorithms for Maximum Clique A Computational Study TR ...

Exact Maximum Clique Algorithm for Different Graph Types ... - MDPI

The Use of an Exact Algorithm within a Tabu Search Maximum ...

 A Faster Branching Algorithm for the Maximum k-Defective Clique ...

 fast algorithms for the maximum clique problem on massive graphs ...

A note on the problem of reporting maximal cliques - ScienceDirect

On cliques in graphs | Israel Journal of Mathematics

 New Algorithms for Enumerating All Maximal Cliques

Fast algorithms for maximal clique enumeration with limited memory

On the overall and delay complexity of the CLIQUES and Bron ...

 HEURISTICS FOR MAXIMUM CLIQUE AND INDEPENDENT SET ...

 Dynamic Local Search for the Maximum Clique Problem - arXiv

Adaptive, Restart, Randomized Greedy Heuristics for Maximum Clique

 Finding Maximum Clique with a Genetic Algorithm

The Use of an Exact Algorithm within a Tabu Search Maximum ...

A Comparative Study on the Maximum Clique Problem

A Short Review on Novel Approaches for Maximum Clique Problem

 Lecture 10: Semidefinite Programming for Planted Clique

A new exact maximum clique algorithm for large and massive ...

 Unsupervised Ordering for Maximum Clique - arXiv

SCCWalk: An efficient local search algorithm and its improvements ...

 Lecture 13 (Notes) 1 Introduction 2 Hardness of Approximation

Fixed-Parameter Tractability and Completeness I: Basic Results

Color-coding | Journal of the ACM

Efficient algorithms for clique problems - ScienceDirect.com

The multicolored graph realization problem - ScienceDirect.com

 Subexponential Parameterized Algorithms on Bounded-Genus ...

Robust Contraction Decomposition for Minor-Free Graphs and its ...

Probabilistic checking of proofs: a new characterization of NP

Clique is hard to approximate withinn 1 | Acta Mathematica

Clique Is Hard to Approximate within n 1-o(1) - SpringerLink

 Linear Degree Extractors and the Inapproximability of Max Clique ...

 lower bounds for monotone complexity of some boolean functions

 1 The Razborov monotone circuit lower bound - UCSD Math

 Average-Case Complexity of Detecting Cliques Benjamin Rossman

Detecting cliques in CONGEST networks | Distributed Computing

 New Bounds for the CLIQUE-GAP Problem Using Graph ...

Streaming and Communication Complexity of Clique Approximation

Quantum speedup in solving the maximal-clique problem

A parameter-independent algorithm of finding maximum clique with ...

 Approximation and Inapproximability Results for Maximum Clique of ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion