COBOL Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 16 days ago 
COBOL
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 COBOL, or Common Business-Oriented Language, is a high-level programming language specifically designed for business data processing and applications, featuring an English-like syntax that emphasizes readability for both programmers and non-technical users.
Developed in 1959 by the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL), a consortium sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense, COBOL aimed to create a standardized language for business computing across diverse hardware platforms.
Influenced by earlier efforts like Grace Hopper's FLOW-MATIC, the first COBOL specification was approved in 1960, with the initial program running on an RCA 501 computer later that year.
Key contributors included Hopper, who directed early applications, and others such as Mary Hawes and Howard Bromberg, who helped shape its foundational design.
COBOL's structure is organized into four main divisionsIdentification, Environment, Data, and Proceduresupporting robust file handling, precise decimal arithmetic, and scalable processing for large datasets.
Standardized by ANSI in 1968 and subsequently by ISO, the language has evolved through multiple revisions, including COBOL-85 for enhanced portability, COBOL 2002 for object-oriented features, and the 2023 standard (ISO/IEC 1989:2023), with implementations offering improved interoperability with modern technologies like cloud services and JSON.
Despite its age, COBOL powers critical infrastructure worldwide, handling, as of February 2026, over 43% of global banking systems running on COBOL, 95% of US ATM transactions processed by COBOL-based systems, 80% of in-person transactions relying on it, and generating more than $3 billion in daily commerce, particularly in finance, government, and administrative sectors. Additionally, approximately 70% of banks globally still rely on legacy systems (based on 2025 data), with 45 of the top 50 banks depending on mainframes often driven by COBOL.
Its enduring use stems from proven reliability, efficiency in high-volume transactions, and the immense cost and risk of migrating legacy systems built on it.

Overview

Definition and Purpose

COBOL, an acronym for Common Business-Oriented Language, is a high-level, compiled programming language specifically designed for developing business applications that involve large-scale data processing. It emphasizes an English-like syntax to enhance readability, making it accessible to non-technical users such as business analysts and programmers without deep scientific computing backgrounds. This design facilitates the creation of robust, maintainable code for handling complex datasets in commercial environments.
The primary purpose of COBOL is to enable the development of portable programs for financial, administrative, and transaction-based systems, prioritizing reliability, maintainability, and data integrity over computational speed. It was created to support non-scientific computing tasks, such as payroll processing, inventory management, and banking transactions, by providing built-in support for fixed-point decimal arithmetic and file handling suited to business logic. Unlike assembly languages, which required machine-specific coding, COBOL promotes machine independence, allowing code to run across diverse hardware and operating systems with minimal modifications.
COBOL first emerged in 1959 through the efforts of the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL), a consortium formed under U.S. Department of Defense guidance to standardize business programming and replace fragmented proprietary languages. It was subsequently standardized by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1968 and later adopted by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), with ongoing maintenance to ensure its relevance in modern data processing. This historical development underscored COBOL's role in bridging the gap between business needs and computing technology, fostering widespread adoption in enterprise systems.

Design Principles and Goals

COBOL's design was guided by the Short Range Committee of the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL), established in 1959, which aimed to create a standardized programming language for business data processing that emphasized clarity, interoperability, and practicality for commercial applications. The committee's philosophy prioritized a verbose, English-like syntax to enhance readability and make the language accessible to non-technical users, such as business analysts and managers, who could understand and contribute to program logic without deep programming expertise. This approach contrasted with more mathematical or symbolic languages of the era, focusing instead on self-documenting code that resembled natural business prose.
Central goals included achieving portability across diverse hardware platforms by avoiding machine-specific instructions, thereby reducing dependency on individual vendors and enabling code reuse in multi-vendor environments. Maintainability was another key objective, with design choices supporting large-scale development by teams of programmers and business experts, emphasizing modular structures and clear data definitions over complex algorithmic constructs. The language's orientation toward data manipulationsuch as sorting, merging, and validating recordsreflected its primary role in handling voluminous business transactions, rather than scientific computations.
Core principles outlined by the Short Range Committee included support for hierarchical data structures to model complex business records, like nested customer accounts or inventory hierarchies, allowing intuitive organization of information. Report generation was a foundational feature, with built-in capabilities for formatting output into business reports, including headings, summaries, and totals, to meet the era's emphasis on printed documentation. File handling was equally central, providing robust mechanisms for sequential and indexed access to large datasets, essential for batch-oriented business operations like payroll or accounting.
These principles were heavily influenced by earlier languages such as FLOW-MATIC, which inspired the English-like syntax and business focus, and COMTRAN, which contributed ideas for data description and file management, ultimately aiming to establish a "common language" that minimized vendor lock-in and promoted standardization in business computing.

History

Origins in the Late 1950s

In the late 1950s, the business programming landscape faced a significant crisis due to the proliferation of machine-specific assembly languages and early high-level languages, which hindered portability and increased development costs across diverse computer systems. The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), a major user of computers from multiple manufacturers, recognized this fragmentation as a barrier to efficient data processing and pushed for a unified, machine-independent language to streamline operations in government and business applications.
This impetus led to the formation of the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL) on June 4, 1959, under the chairmanship of Charles A. Phillips, with an initial steering committee meeting held on May 28-29, 1959, at the Pentagon involving government officials, users, and computer manufacturers. Within CODASYL, the Short Range Committee was established at that Pentagon meeting and officially tasked with developing an interim specification for a common business-oriented language; it was chaired by Joseph Wegstein of the National Bureau of Standards, who led a series of intensive meetings starting June 23-24, 1959, to evaluate and synthesize existing approaches.
The committee drew primary influence from Grace Hopper's FLOW-MATIC, developed at Remington Rand Univac in 1955-1958, which emphasized English-like syntax and separation of data description from procedures to enhance readability for non-technical users. Additional contributions came from IBM's COMTRAN (Commercial Translator, 1957-1959), which informed data handling structures, and Honeywell's FACT (1958), providing insights into report generation, though FLOW-MATIC served as the foundational model. By September 4, 1959, the committee produced an initial report outlining the language's core elements, culminating in a complete specification released in December 1959; this paved the way for first implementations by major vendors in early 1960, targeting the replacement of numerous proprietary dialects then in use for business computing.

Initial Standardization (19601965)

The initial standardization effort for COBOL culminated in the release of the COBOL-60 specification by the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL) in April 1960. This foundational document outlined the language's structure to promote portability and readability for business applications, dividing programs into four primary sections: the Identification Division for program metadata, the Environment Division for system configuration, the Data Division for defining variables and files, and the Procedure Division for executable logic. Key statements in the Procedure Division included MOVE for transferring data between fields and ADD for performing arithmetic additions, enabling straightforward manipulation of business records without low-level machine instructions. These elements were designed to abstract hardware differences, allowing the same code to run on diverse systems with minimal changes.
Building on this base, CODASYL published COBOL-61 in 1961, incorporating minor clarifications to resolve ambiguities in the original specification and enhance portability across vendors. This revision emphasized consistent interpretation of core features, such as data movement and control flow, to reduce compilation errors when transferring programs between machines. Despite these efforts, variations in implementation persisted, and formal ANSI standardization began in 1962, culminating in the 1968 standard.
By 1965, CODASYL released COBOL-65, which introduced targeted refinements to support advanced business tasks like report generation and data organization. Notable additions included facilities for report writing, such as the Report Writer module with clauses for defining report layouts, headings, footings, and detail lines to automate formatted output. Sorting capabilities were bolstered with the SORT statement, allowing ordered processing of files via input and output procedures. Input/output operations were streamlined through the ACCEPT statement for reading from external sources like consoles and the DISPLAY statement for outputting to devices, replacing ad-hoc methods from earlier versions. These updates made COBOL more practical for generating summaries and handling sequential data in commercial environments.
Early adoption saw COBOL implemented on midrange systems such as the IBM 1401 and UNIVAC II, where compilers translated source code into executable formats tailored to their architectures. By 1965, numerous COBOL compilers existed across vendors, reflecting widespread interest but also exacerbating interoperability issues stemming from proprietary extensions that altered standard syntax and semantics. These deviations often required code rewrites for cross-system portability, underscoring the need for stricter adherence to CODASYL guidelines.

Major Revisions (19681985)

The major revisions to COBOL from 1968 to 1985 were driven by the emergence of minicomputers, which required more efficient and portable code, and the growing adoption of database management systems (DBMS), necessitating better support for complex data structures and inter-program communication. These updates built on the foundational 1960s standard by emphasizing modular programming, enhanced file handling, and standardization to curb the explosion of vendor-specific dialects, ultimately aiming to limit major variants to fewer than 20 through defined subsets (high, intermediate, minimum) for consistent implementation across systems.
The 1968 ANSI standard (X3.23-1968) marked the first full formalization of COBOL, introducing key features for improved program organization and modularity during the mainframe era's expansion. Subprograms were added via the CALL statement, which transfers control to another program using literals or identifiers, supported by the USING phrase in the Procedure Division for passing data items and the Linkage Section in the Data Division to describe shared data between calling and called programs. Table handling was enhanced with the OCCURS clause, enabling fixed- and variable-length tables (up to three or four dimensions) defined with INDEXED BY for efficient access via subscripting or indexing, alongside the SEARCH and SEARCH ALL statements for serial and non-serial lookups, and the SET statement for managing index references. Segmentation modules allowed programs to be divided into up to 100 logical segments using segment numbers (0-99) and the SEGMENT-LIMIT clause, supporting overlayable fixed segments and independent segments to optimize memory usage and organization, with restrictions on PERFORM and ALTER statements to maintain control flow within segments. These additions promoted separate compilation and reusable code via the COPY statement (with optional REPLACING for text substitution), addressing the need for larger, more structured business applications on evolving hardware.
The 1974 revision (ANSI X3.23-1974) incorporated feedback from CODASYL and industry use, focusing on international compatibility and advanced file operations to support minicomputer environments and emerging DBMS requirements. National language support was introduced through the CODE-SET clause in the File Description, allowing specification of non-native character sets (e.g., ASCII variants) for input/output processing, which facilitated adaptation to diverse international systems without altering core syntax. File description enhancements included the FILE STATUS clause for retrieving two-character I/O status codes after operations, enabling better error handling, and the OPEN EXTEND option in Sequential I/O to append records to existing files. The Indexed I/O module was expanded to support multi-key retrieval using prime and alternate record keys, improving random and dynamic access for database-like structures, while the DELETE statement allowed removal of indexed records. These changes, drawn partly from CODASYL developments, enhanced modularity with refined inter-program communication via CALL, CANCEL, and EXIT PROGRAM, responding to the need for DBMS integration in business applications on smaller systems.
The 1985 standard (ANSI X3.23-1985, ISO 1989-1985) further modernized COBOL for interactive and database-driven environments, adding facilities for validation and built-in computations while promoting portability to minimize dialect variations. I/O capabilities were expanded with the LINAGE clause in the File Description, specifying logical page depth (e.g., lines for top, body, footing) and integrating with LINAGE-COUNTER for tracking position during WRITE operations with ADVANCING PAGE or END-OF-PAGE phrases, alongside new access modes (RANDOM, DYNAMIC) for indexed files and enhanced status codes (e.g., 00 for success, 22 for duplicate key). Intrinsic functions were introduced (with full detailing in the 1989 amendment, X3.23a-1989), providing 46 built-in operations such as DATE, TIME, WHEN-COMPILED for timestamps, NUMVAL and NUMVAL-C for string-to-numeric conversion, and mathematical functions like COS and VARIANCE, callable directly in expressions to automate common calculations without external routines. Validation features included the VALIDATE verb for checking data item conformity (e.g., against level-numbers 01-49 and special registers), expanded FILE STATUS for detailed I/O feedback, ON SIZE ERROR handling in arithmetic statements, and the EVALUATE statement for multi-branch conditional logic, all supporting data integrity in interactive setups. Support for interactive systems came via the new Communication Module, enhancing ACCEPT and DISPLAY for terminal I/O with mnemonic names and message queues (RECEIVE, SEND), plus STRING/UNSTRING for data parsing and the Report Writer's advanced page management with control breaks and SUM clauses, enabling efficient handling of low-volume, real-time transactions alongside DBMS needs. By defining precise behaviors for previously ambiguous elements and optional modules, the standard reduced implementation dialects, fostering greater code transferability across mainframes and minicomputers.

Modern Enhancements (20022023)

The ISO/IEC 1989:2002 standard marked a significant evolution for COBOL by incorporating object-oriented programming capabilities, enabling developers to define classes, support inheritance, and implement polymorphism primarily through factory objects that manage class instantiation and methods. These features allowed COBOL programs to leverage modular, reusable code structures while maintaining compatibility with existing procedural codebases. The additions built on earlier modular elements but introduced a paradigm shift toward object encapsulation and dynamic method invocation, facilitating integration with other OO languages.
Subsequent revisions continued to modernize COBOL for contemporary data processing needs. The ISO/IEC 1989:2014 standard enhanced XML handling with dedicated syntax for generating and parsing XML documents, streamlining data exchange in web-integrated business applications. It also introduced dynamic memory management through ALLOCATE and FREE statements, along with the DYNAMIC LENGTH clause for variable-sized data items, reducing reliance on static allocations. Additionally, support for IEEE 754 binary floating-point arithmetic was added, including new data types and PICTURE clause options for edited floating-point items, ensuring precise numerical computations across diverse hardware platforms.
The most recent edition, ISO/IEC 1989:2023, focused on bolstering interoperability and efficiency in distributed environments. Key improvements include support for asynchronous messaging with SEND and RECEIVE statements, enhanced file handling such as DELETE FILE and COMMIT/ROLLBACK, and other enhancements for modern environments like extended COBOL words to 63 characters and improved PERFORM statements. These updates promote COBOL's adaptability to cloud-native architectures and microservices, allowing legacy systems to interface with modern APIs and scalable infrastructures without full rewrites. Throughout these developments, the standards are maintained by ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG4, ensuring ongoing evolution to meet enterprise demands.

Technical Features

Program Structure and Divisions

A COBOL source program is organized in a fixed-format structure, with each line limited to 80 columns to accommodate historical punched-card origins. Columns 1 through 6 are reserved for optional sequence numbers, column 7 serves as an indicator area for flags such as comments or continuations, columns 8 through 11 comprise Area A for division headers and section names, columns 12 through 72 form Area B for the bulk of the code, and columns 73 through 80 are typically ignored or used for comments.
The program consists of four divisions in a fixed sequence: Identification (mandatory), Environment (optional), Data (optional), and Procedure (required for executable programs), which together define the program's metadata, configuration, data structures, and executable logic.
The Identification Division is the first and required division, containing paragraphs that specify the program name via the PROGRAM-ID paragraph, along with optional details such as the author, installation, and date written for documentation and maintenance purposes. In object-oriented COBOL extensions, the Identification Division header becomes optional when defining classes or methods, allowing direct use of CLASS-ID or METHOD-ID paragraphs.
The Environment Division, which follows the Identification Division and is optional in non-executable program definitions, configures the program's interaction with the host system through two sections: the Configuration Section for specifying source and object computer details, special names, and memory allocation, and the Input-Output Section for defining file controls, I/O devices, and control paragraphs.
The Data Division comes next, providing a high-level declaration of the program's data items, records, and files, while the Procedure Division concludes the structure with the executable statements that implement the program's control flow and operations.

Data Division and Types

The Data Division in COBOL defines all data items used by the program, including files, working storage, and linkage parameters, ensuring structured representation suitable for business applications. It is subdivided into sections that organize data declarations hierarchically, allowing for precise control over storage, access, and manipulation. This division is essential for describing input, output, and internal data without specifying procedural logic.
The FILE SECTION describes external files and their record structures, specifying how data is read from or written to files such as sequential or indexed files. It contains file description entries (FD) followed by record descriptions, enabling the program to interface with external data sources. The WORKING-STORAGE SECTION declares internal data items, including variables, constants, and temporary storage that persist throughout program execution unless explicitly modified. Static data in this section remains allocated for the program's lifetime, while instance or factory data in object-oriented COBOL is defined here for class persistence.
The LINKAGE SECTION defines data passed between programs or methods, such as parameters in subprogram calls or external interfaces, ensuring compatibility without duplicating storage definitions. It is particularly used for communication in modular programs, where data items are referenced but not allocated locally. The LOCAL-STORAGE SECTION, introduced in later standards for dynamic environments, allocates data items per invocation of a method or program, initializing them each time and deallocating upon return; this contrasts with WORKING-STORAGE by providing invocation-specific temporary storage.
Data within these sections is organized into records and groups using level numbers, which establish a hierarchical structure. Level 01 defines the highest level, typically a complete record description that encompasses all subordinate items, and must begin in Area A of the source code. Levels 02 through 49 describe subordinate group or elementary items within a higher level, allowing nested hierarchies; these can start in Area A or B, with higher numbers indicating deeper subordination. For example, a level 01 record for an employee might contain level 05 groups for address components.
Special level numbers provide additional flexibility: level 66 is used with the RENAMES clause to redefine subsets of records for simplified referencing, such as aliasing a group of fields. Level 77 declares independent elementary items not subordinated to any group, useful for standalone constants or flags. Level 88 defines condition names, which associate symbolic values with elementary items for conditional testing, like mapping "YES" or "NO" to a flag field without direct comparison. These levels ensure data descriptions remain modular and readable.
Data types are specified using the PICTURE (PIC) clause, which defines the format and category of elementary items. For numeric data, PIC uses symbols like 9 for digits, V for implied decimal point, P for implied decimal scaling, and S for sign; combined with USAGE DISPLAY, it stores zoned decimal format readable as text. Numeric items can also use COMP (synonymous with BINARY or COMP-4/COMP-5 for binary storage) for efficient arithmetic, supporting up to 18 digits in compatibility mode. Alphanumeric data employs PIC X for fixed-length strings or combinations of X, A (alphabetic), and 9, storing any character set under USAGE DISPLAY. National data, for Unicode support, uses PIC N or G, with USAGE NATIONAL to handle UTF-16 characters, enabling international text processing.
Edited pictures format output for human-readable display, using symbols like Z (zero suppression), * (asterisk fill), / (slash insertion), and currency signs for numeric-edited items under USAGE DISPLAY or NATIONAL. Alphanumeric-edited pictures insert blanks, zeros, or slashes into PIC X/A/9 strings, while national-edited uses N with similar insertions for wide-character output. These clauses ensure formatted reports, such as aligning decimals or suppressing leading zeros in financial statements.
Aggregated data structures support complex business records through clauses like OCCURS, which defines repeating groups or tables (arrays) with a specified number of occurrences, indexing, or dynamic varying sizes. For instance, OCCURS 100 TIMES creates a 100-element table of PIC 9(5) items for inventory quantities, enabling efficient iteration. The REDEFINES clause allows multiple descriptions of the same storage area, overlaying alternative interpretations; a fixed-length field might redefine as a shorter variable item or union-like structure for variant records.
The USAGE clause specifies internal storage formats beyond the default DISPLAY, optimizing for performance in computations. USAGE BINARY (or COMP-5) stores integers in native binary, ideal for indexes or counters with fast arithmetic. USAGE PACKED-DECIMAL (COMP-3) compacts numeric data into half-bytes per digit plus a sign, supporting up to 18 digits efficiently for financial calculations without precision loss. These options balance storage efficiency and computational speed in data-heavy applications.
01 EMPLOYEE-RECORD.
 05 EMP-ID PIC 9(5) USAGE BINARY.
 05 EMP-NAME PIC X(20).
 05 SALARY PIC 9(7)V99 USAGE PACKED-DECIMAL.
 05 BONUS-TABLE OCCURS 12 TIMES.
 10 BONUS-AMT PIC 9(5)V99.
 05 FLAGS PIC X.
 88 VALID-EMP VALUE 'Y'.
This example illustrates a record with numeric types, an array via OCCURS, and a condition name at level 88.

Procedure Division and Control Flow

The Procedure Division contains the executable instructions of a COBOL program, defining the logic that processes data defined elsewhere in the program. It is optional but essential for programs that perform computations or I/O operations, beginning execution at the first statement after any declaratives and proceeding sequentially unless control is transferred. The division supports modular organization through named paragraphs and sections, enabling reusable blocks of code that promote structured programming.
Structurally, the Procedure Division consists of paragraphsblocks of one or more sentences identified by a paragraph-name followed by a periodand sections, which group paragraphs under a section-name followed by the reserved word SECTION. Declaratives form an optional initial segment, enclosed between the keywords DECLARATIVES and END DECLARATIVES, dedicated to non-executable procedures for handling exceptions like input-output errors or debugging. USE statements within declaratives specify procedures triggered by specific events, such as USE AFTER STANDARD ERROR PROCEDURE for I/O exceptions or USE GLOBAL for broader applicability across called programs. Unnamed paragraphs or implicit sections can hold inline code not grouped under names.
Key statements in the Procedure Division handle arithmetic, data movement, and basic control. Arithmetic operations include ADD, which sums numeric operands and optionally gives results with rounding or error handling (e.g., ON SIZE ERROR); SUBTRACT for subtraction; MULTIPLY for multiplication; and DIVIDE for division, supporting up to 18 digits and features like REMAINDER or ON SIZE ERROR. Data movement uses MOVE to transfer values between identifiers, with CORRESPONDING for group items, and STRING to concatenate literals or data items delimited by spaces or pointers, handling overflow via ON OVERFLOW. Control statements encompass GO TO for unconditional branching (with DEPENDING ON for conditional targets), EXIT to terminate a procedure as a standalone sentence, and IF for conditionals evaluating relational or class expressions, supporting THEN, ELSE, NEXT SENTENCE, or END-IF phrases.
The PERFORM statement provides primary control flow for executing procedures, invoking named paragraphs or sections (optionally THROUGH to a range) a specified number of TIMES or UNTIL a condition, with inline PERFORM (delimited by END-PERFORM) allowing embedded code blocks introduced in the 1985 ANSI standard (COBOL-85). Loops are implemented via PERFORM VARYING, which iterates over an index varying from a start value by an increment until a limit or condition, supporting up to six varying phrases and TEST BEFORE or AFTER options for loop control. For multi-way branching, EVALUATE (introduced in the 1985 ANSI standard (COBOL-85)) assesses a subject against multiple WHEN conditions or TRUE for arbitrary tests, ending with END-EVALUATE and a default WHEN OTHER. Program termination uses STOP RUN to halt the run unit and close files implicitly, or GOBACK (equivalent to EXIT PROGRAM) to return control to the caller.
Procedures operate in inline or separate scopes: inline code executes sequentially within the current flow, limited to local context, while separate procedures in named paragraphs or sections can be called via PERFORM or GO TO, enabling modularity across the program. Self-modifying code was possible via the ALTER statement, which changed GO TO targets at runtime, but it was made obsolescent in the 1974 ANSI standard, obsolete in the 1985 ANSI standard, and deleted in the 2002 ISO standard to encourage structured practices.
For example, a simple arithmetic and loop construct might appear as:
PERFORM VARYING WS-COUNTER FROM 1 BY 1 UNTIL WS-COUNTER > 5
 ADD WS-VALUE TO WS-TOTAL
 MOVE WS-TOTAL TO WS-DISPLAY
END-PERFORM.
This iterates addition five times, referencing data items defined previously.

Syntax Rules and Formatting

COBOL's syntax is formally defined in its international standards using syntax diagrams, a graphical metalanguage that illustrates the structure and permissible combinations of language elements, akin to but distinct from Backus-Naur Form (BNF) notations employed in other language specifications. This approach ensures precise, machine-independent descriptions of grammar rules, covering everything from program divisions to individual statements, and promotes consistent implementation across compilers. The diagrams depict required keywords, optional clauses, and repetition or choice among alternatives, facilitating both human readability and automated parsing.
A core aspect of COBOL's syntax is its extensive set of reserved words, exceeding 400 in number, which carry predefined meanings and cannot be repurposed as user-defined names to avoid conflicts with compiler directives or language constructs. These include verbs like ADD, SUBTRACT, and MOVE, as well as nouns such as FILE, RECORD, and WORKING-STORAGE, all typically presented in uppercase to emphasize their special status, though the language itself is case-insensitive. This convention underscores COBOL's design goal of English-like readability, where statements read as natural sentencesfor instance, "ADD TAX-AMOUNT TO GRAND-TOTAL"promoting self-documenting code that reduces the need for extensive comments.
Syntactic rules further enforce this verbose, declarative style: statements conclude with a period (.) as a terminator, rather than semicolons used in many other languages, and separators like spaces or commas delimit character strings without altering semantics. Hierarchical structure is implied through the organization of sections, paragraphs, and sentences within divisions, often visually reinforced by indentation for clarity, though not strictly mandated by the syntax. Nouns in statements must be descriptive to enhance maintainability, aligning with the language's business-oriented ethos.
In the Data Division, the PICTURE clause serves as a key descriptive tool for defining elementary data items, specifying their category, size, and editing characteristics through symbolic notationsuch as 9 for numeric digits, X for alphanumeric characters, or V for implied decimalswithout directly affecting storage allocation. For example, PIC 9(5)V99 describes a numeric item with five integer digits, an implied decimal point, and two fractional digits, enabling precise control over data representation and validation. This clause exemplifies COBOL's focus on explicit data formatting for business applications.
Formatting conventions in COBOL have evolved to balance legacy constraints with modern flexibility. Early standards enforced a fixed-form layout, reminiscent of punch-card origins, where code occupies specific columns: 8 through 11 for sequence numbers (optional), 12 through 72 for statement text, and positions beyond 72 ignored, with column 7 indicating continuations or comments. The ISO/IEC 1989:2002 standard introduced free-form syntax, permitting statements to begin in any column and extend beyond traditional limits, while retaining compatibility with fixed-form for legacy systems.
Reference modification provides a mechanism for substring access within data items, using the notation data-name(starting-position : length), where starting-position is the leftmost character index (1-based) and length is optional (defaulting to the remainder). This allows operations on portions of fields, such as moving characters 4 through 7 of a name field via MOVE ORIGINAL-NAME(4:4) TO SUB-NAME, enhancing data manipulation without temporary variables and supporting the language's emphasis on precise, readable expressions.

Implementations and Usage

Compilers and Runtime Environments

The development of COBOL compilers began in late 1960, with the first implementations created by UNIVAC and IBM to demonstrate the language's portability across different hardware. UNIVAC's compiler, led by Harold "Bud" Lawson under Grace Hopper, targeted the UNIVAC II system and was built using the FLOW-MATIC language, producing executable code through a multi-pass process that took 8-10 minutes for simple programs. IBM's early effort, known as the Commercial Translator, evolved into production compilers for its mainframes, emphasizing business data processing compatibility. These initial compilers established COBOL's foundation on mainframe environments, with the first successful cross-system execution of a COBOL program occurring on December 6-7, 1960, between UNIVAC II and RCA 501 hardware.
Modern proprietary compilers continue to dominate enterprise use, with IBM Enterprise COBOL for z/OS serving as the primary implementation for IBM Z mainframes. Version 6.5, released in June 2025, supports full COBOL 2014 standards and optimizes code generation for z17 hardware architectures, including ARCH(15) compiler options for enhanced performance. It requires Language Environment (LE) runtime libraries, which provide predefined routines for file input/output (I/O), mathematical operations, and system interfacing, ensuring efficient execution on z/OS batch and transaction processing workloads. Micro Focus COBOL, now under Rocket Software as Visual COBOL (version 11.0, released in October 2025), extends COBOL development to distributed systems with seamless integration for .NET and Java environments, allowing hybrid applications on Windows, Unix, and Linux. This compiler supports runtime execution for both batch jobs and online transaction processing via CICS emulation in Rocket Enterprise Server.
Open-source efforts have gained traction for broader accessibility and portability. GnuCOBOL (formerly OpenCOBOL), a GNU Project compiler, generates native executables compliant with COBOL 2014 and earlier dialects, running on Linux, BSD, macOS, Windows, and Unix variants without proprietary dependencies. In 2025, the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) integrated a new COBOL front-end developed by Symas COBOLworx, released in GCC 15.1 on April 28, enabling direct compilation of COBOL 2023-compliant code to modern 64-bit platforms like x86-64, with built-in support for XML, JSON, and SQL extensions. This front-end, comprising over 130,000 lines of code, enhances debugging via GNU Debugger (GDB) and facilitates recompilation of legacy code for open environments.
COBOL runtime environments span traditional mainframes to cloud infrastructures, providing consistent support for diverse processing modes. On z/OS mainframes, IBM's runtime handles batch scheduling via JCL and online interactions through CICS transaction monitors, leveraging optimized libraries for decimal arithmetic and sequential file handling. Distributed platforms like Unix/Linux and Windows use Visual COBOL's runtime for cross-platform deployment, including JVM for Java interoperability and .NET CLR for Windows integration. In cloud settings, AWS Mainframe Modernization services enable COBOL execution in managed environments, supporting batch workloads with AWS Batch and CICS-like online processing through AWS Lambda or ECS, while preserving file I/O semantics via compatible runtime libraries. These environments ensure COBOL's portability, with runtimes abstracting platform-specific details for math functions and data access.

Applications in Industry

COBOL remains dominant in the financial sector, where recent data (as of 20252026) indicate that over 43% of global banking systems run on COBOL, approximately 70% of banks globally still rely on legacy systems (based on 2025 data), and 45 of the top 50 banks depend on mainframes often driven by COBOL. In the United States, COBOL-based systems process 95% of ATM transactions and swipes, while supporting 80% of in-person transactions. It underpins approximately 70% of global business transactions, including core banking operations, payment processing, and ATM networks.
In government applications, COBOL powers essential systems for agencies like the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which relies on about 160 COBOL-based applications for tax processing, and the Social Security Administration (SSA), where roughly 60 million lines of COBOL code manage beneficiary databases and payments. These implementations highlight COBOL's reliability for high-volume, mission-critical tasks that demand precision and security.
In retail, COBOL supports inventory management and supply chain systems in large organizations, enabling efficient tracking of stock levels, order fulfillment, and point-of-sale integration across vast operations. Specific examples include Bank of America's use of COBOL for the majority of its transaction processing, handling vast numbers of daily financial operations with proven stability. Similarly, legacy components of airline reservation systems, such as those at Delta Airlines, depend on COBOL for booking, scheduling, and passenger data management, ensuring seamless global operations despite the systems' age.
The scale of COBOL's deployment underscores its enduring industrial footprint, with an estimated over 800 billion lines of code in active production worldwide, processing around $3 trillion in daily commerce. As of 2025, COBOL drives approximately 70% of business workloads among Fortune 500 companies, particularly in sectors requiring robust transaction handling. This reliance has contributed to a growing global shortage of qualified COBOL programmers, exacerbated by retirements and limited new training, posing challenges for maintenance in these critical infrastructures.

Legacy Challenges and Y2K

The Year 2000 (Y2K) problem, also known as the millennium bug, arose from the widespread practice of storing calendar years using only two digits to conserve limited computer memory, a constraint prevalent in the 1960s and 1970s when mainframe systems were dominant. For example, the year 1999 would be represented as "99," but the rollover to 2000 as "00" risked being misinterpreted by software as 1900, potentially causing errors in date calculations, sorting, financial transactions, and system operations across industries reliant on legacy computers.
COBOL played a central role in the Y2K crisis due to its dominance in business and government applications, where dates were commonly defined using the PICTURE clause as PIC 99 for two-digit years, such as in data records for birth dates or transaction timestamps. This convention, efficient for early hardware but inflexible for century transitions, affected millions of lines of COBOL code in critical systems like banking, insurance, and payroll processing. Later COBOL standards, including extensions in IBM implementations aligned with ANSI/ISO specifications from the 1980s onward, introduced the DATE FORMAT clause to support windowed date fields, allowing two-digit years to be interpreted within a defined 100-year sliding window (e.g., assuming years 0049 as 20002049), but this did not apply retroactively to existing legacy code.
Resolution efforts from 1995 to 2000 involved extensive global remediation, estimated at over $300 billion, encompassing code audits, testing, and modifications to expand date fields to four digits (e.g., PIC 9(4) for years like 2000). In the United States, the federal government mandated Y2K compliance through Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directives, requiring agencies to inventory mission-critical systems, achieve remediation milestones, and report progress quarterly, with non-compliant systems prioritized for fixes or replacements. These measures included hiring specialists for COBOL audits and integrating four-digit year handling, ultimately ensuring that 99% of federal systems were compliant by late 1999.
Following the millennium rollover on January 1, 2000, the Y2K problem caused minimal disruptions worldwide, thanks to proactive efforts that heightened awareness of robust date handling in legacy systems like those written in COBOL, whose inherent stability in structured programming contributed to averting widespread failures.

Modernization and Current Relevance

Efforts to modernize COBOL systems in the 2020s have focused on strategies such as refactoring legacy code to modern languages like Java, rehosting applications to cloud environments, and leveraging AI for code analysis and transformation. Refactoring typically involves automated tools that convert COBOL business logic into object-oriented structures, enabling integration with contemporary frameworks while preserving core functionality. For instance, organizations have used AI-driven refactoring to migrate COBOL to Java, reducing manual effort and minimizing errors in complex mainframe applications. Rehosting strategies shift COBOL workloads to cloud platforms without full rewrites, often using containerization to maintain performance in distributed systems. AI-assisted analysis tools scan codebases for dependencies, identify refactoring opportunities, and generate migration plans, accelerating the process for enterprises handling mission-critical operations.
Key tools supporting these efforts include IBM's watsonx Code Assistant for Z, which employs generative AI to transform COBOL services into Java equivalents directly within development environments like VS Code or IBM Z Open Editor. This tool aids in understanding legacy code, automating translations, and integrating with modern IDEs to facilitate hybrid development. Rocket Visual COBOL (formerly Micro Focus Visual COBOL) enables the creation of hybrid applications by allowing COBOL code to run alongside .NET, JVM, or cloud-native components, supporting deployment in containers and integration with Visual Studio or Eclipse. In 2025, the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) introduced an open-source COBOL front-end in version 15.1, contributed by COBOLworx, which compiles COBOL 2023-compliant code for 64-bit x86-64 or AArch64 platforms, promoting accessible modernization without proprietary dependencies.
COBOL's continued relevance as of 2026 stems from its proven stability in processing high-volume transactions, underpinning approximately 70-80% of global business operations and powering 95% of ATM transactions daily. Thanks to decades of hardware-software co-optimization on IBM Z systems, COBOL delivers high performance for legacy mainframe transaction processing, with the platform capable of handling up to 25 billion encrypted transactions per day on a single system. Its scalability ensures reliable performance for sectors like banking, where 43% of systems remain COBOL-based, handling trillions in value without frequent failures.
As of 2025-2026, comprehensive head-to-head performance benchmarks comparing COBOL to modern languages such as Rust, Go, Java, and Python remain limited, with industry focus primarily on modernization rather than raw speed comparisons. However, in certain non-mainframe scenarios, modern tools can demonstrate advantages; for example, in a January 2026 benchmark test of a message broker workload, a COBOL-inspired approach using fixed-width files achieved 2,216 messages per second, which was 34% slower than SQLite's 3,370 messages per second, highlighting trade-offs in write-heavy use cases outside optimized mainframe environments.
The estimated cost of full rewrites deters wholesale replacement; for example, Commonwealth Bank of Australia's multi-year core banking modernization exceeded A$1 billion (approximately US$750 million), highlighting the risks and expenses involved in overhauling entrenched systems. Amid a persistent developer shortage, with few academic programs teaching COBOL, companies have launched targeted training initiatives, such as paid onboarding for experienced programmers transitioning to legacy maintenance roles.
Emerging trends in 2025 integrate COBOL into DevOps pipelines and microservices architectures, where legacy modules are exposed via APIs for agile deployment on platforms like Azure, enhancing observability and automation without full migration. This approach allows organizations to evolve COBOL assets incrementally, combining them with cloud-native services to support faster innovation in regulated industries.

Reception and Impact

Criticisms of Design and Usage

COBOL's design has been widely criticized for its verbose syntax, which mandates the use of full English words and phrases for keywords and statements, such as "ADD AMOUNT TO BALANCE" instead of concise operators. This approach, intended to enhance readability for non-technical users like business analysts, results in significantly larger code volumes; for instance, the average COBOL program is around 600 lines, increasing development time and storage requirements compared to more compact languages. The verbosity is seen as inefficient for routine tasks, though proponents argue it reduces errors in data processing applications.
Another major critique centers on the language's early lack of structured programming features, particularly its heavy reliance on the GOTO statement for control flow, which frequently led to unstructured "spaghetti code" with tangled execution paths that are difficult to trace and maintain. Prior to the 1968 standard, COBOL offered limited modularity, with flat procedure divisions and no native support for blocks or functions, forcing developers to use repetitive PERFORM statements or jumps that compounded complexity in large systems. This design encouraged monolithic programs lacking clear hierarchies, exacerbating debugging challenges in mission-critical business environments.
Portability issues further compound these problems, as vendors introduced proprietary extensions to the core standard, creating incompatible "dialects" that hindered code migration across systems. For example, enhancements for input/output operations varied by compiler, requiring significant rewrites when porting applications between platforms like IBM and Unisys mainframes. These extensions, while addressing specific hardware needs, fragmented the language ecosystem and increased long-term maintenance costs.
Influential computer scientist Edsger W. Dijkstra encapsulated broader discontent with COBOL's design in 1975, declaring it "the most disastrous language" and arguing that "the use of COBOL cripples the mind; its teaching should, therefore, be regarded as a criminal offence." This harsh assessment reflected concerns over the language's rigidity and verbosity, which Dijkstra viewed as impediments to logical thinking in programming. Today, the aging COBOL codebaseestimated at over 800 billion lines globally as of 2022remains hard to debug and update without scarce expert knowledge, as much of it relies on undocumented vendor-specific features from decades ago.
While COBOL excels in optimized legacy environments for mainframe transaction processing due to specialized hardware-software integration, recent experiments have highlighted limitations in certain workloads. In a January 2026 test, a COBOL-inspired fixed-width file approach achieved 2,216 messages per second in a write-heavy message workload, 34% slower than SQLite's 3,370 messages per second, demonstrating advantages of modern database systems in some scenarios and contributing to ongoing discussions about COBOL's suitability for new applications and the emphasis on modernization efforts.

Influences on Other Languages

COBOL's design emphasized data-centric processing and readability, profoundly shaping subsequent languages in business and scientific domains. PL/I (Programming Language/1), developed by IBM in the mid-1960s, directly incorporated COBOL's focus on business data handling, such as files and tables, while blending it with FORTRAN's scientific computation capabilities and ALGOL's structured control flow. This synthesis made PL/I a versatile "general-purpose" language that extended COBOL's record-based data manipulation into a more dynamic framework, treating structured data as first-class types with qualified access like user.name. Similarly, RPG (Report Program Generator), introduced by IBM in 1959 for punched-card systems, derived its record-oriented syntax from COBOL's approach to sequential file processing and report generation, prioritizing columnar data layouts for business reports over general-purpose computation.
Beyond direct descendants, COBOL popularized English-like keywords and verbose syntax to enhance readability for non-technical users, influencing declarative and business-oriented languages. BASIC adopted similar intuitive commands such as PRINT and IF...THEN to simplify programming for beginners, echoing COBOL's self-documenting style. SQL's query syntax, using natural-language terms like SELECT, FROM, and WHERE, further propagated this paradigm for data manipulation, making relational database operations accessible without low-level code. COBOL's introduction of hierarchical data structures, via records that nest fields for complex business entities, laid groundwork for type systems in later languages; Pascal directly inherited this concept, with its records enabling variant and nested structures for data abstraction, as acknowledged by designer Niklaus Wirth. Ada extended these ideas into safer, modular hierarchies with packages and records, supporting real-time and embedded systems while retaining COBOL's emphasis on reliable data organization.
In modern contexts, COBOL's evolution toward object-oriented extensions in standards like COBOL 2002 enabled seamless integration with enterprise Java applications, where class-based data modeling mirrors COBOL's procedural business logic in service-oriented architectures. This interoperability has inspired hybrid enterprise development, allowing Java to adopt COBOL-like patterns for legacy data migration and transaction processing. COBOL's structured data handling also prefigured contemporary formats; its nested records anticipated the tree-like organization in XML and JSON, influencing how web languages like JavaScript and Python parse and manipulate hierarchical payloads in APIs and documents.
COBOL's built-in Report Writer feature, which automates formatted output from data files using declarative specifications, directly shaped modern reporting tools by establishing templates for pixel-perfect business documents. Tools like Crystal Reports evolved this legacy, supporting direct ingestion of COBOL data files for generating dynamic summaries and analytics, bridging mainframe-era reporting with contemporary visualization needs. Today, over 800 billion lines of COBOL code remain in production, sustaining maintenance practices that emphasize data integrity and report-driven workflows across global enterprises.

Economic and Cultural Significance

COBOL underpins a substantial portion of the global economy, processing an estimated 80% of in-person financial transactions and 95% of ATM transactions worldwide, which collectively handle trillions of dollars daily in critical sectors like banking and government services. This enduring role has created a scarcity of skilled developers, driving average annual salaries for COBOL programmers in the United States to approximately $105,000 as of 2025, reflecting the high demand for expertise in maintaining these legacy systems. The market for COBOL modernization, including mainframe updates to cloud and AI-integrated environments, is valued at around $8.4 billion in 2025 and projected to grow significantly, as organizations seek to mitigate risks while preserving reliability; the 2023 ISO standard enhancements for interoperability with modern technologies like JSON and cloud services have begun addressing some legacy integration challenges.
Culturally, COBOL has become a symbol of legacy technology's persistence, epitomized by the "COBOL cowboys"retired programmers summoned back to service during the Y2K crisis and again in 2020 to fix outdated unemployment systems strained by the COVID-19 pandemic. This narrative of veteran experts rescuing modern crises has permeated media, portraying COBOL as both a relic of bureaucratic inefficiency and a heroic backbone, as seen in satirical depictions of corporate drudgery in films like Office Space, which highlight the absurdities of entrenched business computing. The 2020 pandemic further amplified educational efforts, with initiatives like calls from U.S. governors for volunteer COBOL programmers sparking widespread interest and training programs to address the skills gap.
COBOL's significance lies in enabling the data-driven revolution in business, where its structured approach to transaction processing laid the foundation for scalable enterprise systems that prioritize accuracy over agility. Now over 65 years in active use since its 1959 standardization, it fuels ongoing debates about technical debtarising from maintenance costs and integration challengesversus its proven reliability in safeguarding critical infrastructure against failures that could disrupt economies. This tension underscores COBOL's historical legacy, akin to preserved milestones in computing history, as it continues to support vital operations without the fanfare of newer technologies.

References

What Is COBOL? - IBM

How COBOL Became the Early Backbone of Federal Computing

Evolution of the COBOL Language at Micro Focus Since 1985

COBOL (Common Business Oriented Language) - TechTarget

Programming language COBOL - ISO/IEC 1989:2014

The early history of COBOL | ACM SIGPLAN Notices

 CODASYL COBOL journal of development 1968

COBOL Session - ACM Digital Library

COBOL - National Museum of American History

Full text of "A view of the History of COBOL" - Internet Archive

 COBOL programming language - Bitsavers.org

First-Hand:Experiences and Reflections of a Computer Pioneer

 History of COBOL - UMBC

 programming language COBOL - NIST Technical Series Publications

An overview of the 1974 COBOL standard - ACM Digital Library

 programming language COBOL - NIST Technical Series Publications

 programming language - intrinsic function module for COBOL

Programming languages COBOL - ISO/IEC 1989:2002

2002/2014 COBOL Standard features implemented in Enterprise ...

Programming language COBOL - ISO/IEC 1989:2023

Available Now - 2023 Edition of ISO/IEC 1989, COBOL - INCITS

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG4 - COBOL - Open Standards

Reference Format - IBM

Fixed Format

COBOL program structure - IBM

Chapter 3: Concepts of a COBOL Program

IDENTIFICATION DIVISION - IBM

1.2.3 Working with OO COBOL

https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cobol-zos/6.3.0?topic=division-environment

DATA DIVISION overview - IBM

Levels of data in a record description entry - IBM

Level-numbers - IBM

Data categories and PICTURE rules - IBM

COBOL - Data Layout - Tutorials Point

USAGE Clause - COBOL Computational Items - Mainframe Tutorials

Chapter 10: Procedure Division

Obsolete language elements - IBM

 Language Standardization Needs Grammarware - Vadim Zaytsev

ILE COBOL Syntax Notation - IBM

Reserved words - Enterprise COBOL - IBM

COBOL - Basic Syntax - Tutorials Point

Chapter 2: Concepts of the COBOL Language

https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cobol-zos/6.3.0?topic=clauses-picture

Coding Sheet in COBOL - GeeksforGeeks

COBOL and Mainframes - Organizations and Standards - Infogoal

Reference modification - IBM

 The World's First COBOL Compilers

 A View of The History of Cobol

IBM Enterprise COBOL for z/OS

COBOL compiler versions, required runtimes, and support information

Rocket Visual COBOL | COBOL Application Development | Rocket Software

 Deploying Mainframe Applications to Amazon Web Services (AWS)

GnuCOBOL - GNU Project

GCC COBOL Developed by Symas' COBOLworx team

GNU compiler collection 15.1 released: COBOL support, improved ...

Mainframe Migration

What is COBOL? - Rocket Software

COBOL Code Red: 3 Strategies to Enable Successful Government ...

No, 150-Year-Olds Aren't Collecting Social Security Benefits | WIRED

How to Deal With COBOL Migration: Practical Advice from Experts

cobol - HG Insights - Technology Discovery Platform

Why Do Fortune 500 Companies Still Use Legacy Systems?

COBOL Language: Call It A Comeback? - Forbes

COBOL: Why Young Developers Should Learn Old Languages

COBOL in 2025: Legacy or Opportunity? - Sysmatch

Y2K | National Museum of American History

Zeroing in on the Millennium - Y Magazine

Strategies for Solving the Y2K Problem - Jacob Filipp

https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cobol-zos/6.3.0?topic=division-data-description-entry

Y2K: The good, the bad and the crazy - Reuters

Y2K 4th Quarterly Report - The White House

 Costs and Planned Use of Emergency Funds - GAO

IBM watsonx Code Assistant for Z

https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/migration-and-modernization/aws-for-mainframe-modernization-your-complete-reinvent-2025-guide/

How We Use AI Agents for COBOL Migration and Mainframe ...

GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection - GNU Project

If COBOL is so problematic, why does the US government still use it?

FairCom RTG modernizes COBOL with lower costs and less time

COBOL in the Cloud: DevOps-Driven Deployment to Azure - LinkedIn

The Ongoing Viability of COBOL in a Modern IT Landscape - Elnion

COBOL as a Modern Language

Computer Programming

Ode or Code? Programmers be Mused! - ACM Queue

CSE 230 Notes, Sethi 3

 Evolution of PLs

Comparative Programming Languages

Chapter 5: Portability Issues

 Improving Cobol Applications Can Recover Significant Computer ...

9.1.1 Traditional COBOL Programming Methodology

Edsger Dijkstra - How do we tell truths that might hurt?

 COBOL Cripples The Mind!: Academia and the Alienation of Data ...

Lessons from PL/I: A Most Ambitious Programming Language

10 Most(ly dead) Influential Programming Languages - Hillel Wayne

Cobol and RPG: a deep dive on high-level programming languages

Brush up your COBOL: Why is a 60 year old language suddenly in ...

Recollections about the development of Pascal - ACM Digital Library

 Evolution of the Major Programming Languages

Using Java Native Interface (JNI) with COBOL - IBM

Data2Cr: Cobol Files in Crystal Reports

This old programming language is much more important than you ...

Understanding COBOL: The Backbone of Business Computing That ...

Salary: Cobol Developer in United States 2025 - Glassdoor

Mainframe Modernization Market worth $13.34 billion by 2030

'COBOL Cowboys' Aim To Rescue Sluggish State Unemployment ...

COBOL Cowboys: Respect Your Elders, Programming Edition

Unemployment checks are being held up by a coding language ...

COBOL : Common Business-Oriented Language - InterSoft Associates

COBOL's 65th Anniversary: Industry Experts Weigh In - TechChannel

AI Breaks the COBOL Modernization Cost Barrier in 2026

How come COBOL-driven mainframes are still the banking system of choice?

2025 Legacy Code Stats: Costs, Risks &amp; Modernization

How come COBOL-driven mainframes are still the banking system of choice?

What Is COBOL?

Lost in Translation: What the AI code debate keeps getting wrong

I Tried to Outperform Modern Database with COBOLs 50-Year-Old Trick

I Tried to Outperform Modern Database with COBOLs 50-Year-Old Trick
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion