Collation Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Collation
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Collation is the process of comparing and arranging elements, such as written information, documents, or characters, into a specific order according to defined rules. This assembly can occur in various contexts, including the sorting of text in computing and linguistics, the gathering of printed sheets in bookbinding, and the comparison of manuscripts in textual criticism. Historically, the term also refers to a light meal served during religious fasts, derived from monastic gatherings for reading and refreshment.
In modern computing, collation primarily denotes the set of rules governing how character strings are compared and sorted, ensuring consistency across languages and scripts. The Unicode Collation Algorithm (UCA), a key standard in this domain, provides a framework for tailoring sort orders to cultural and linguistic preferences by assigning weights to characters at multiple levelsprimary for base letters, secondary for accents, and tertiary for case and diacritics. Database systems like SQL Server and MySQL implement collations to handle Unicode data, specifying bit patterns for characters and comparison behaviors such as case sensitivity or accent insensitivity.
Beyond digital applications, collation plays a crucial role in printing and publishing, where it involves sequencing multiple copies of multi-page documents to maintain proper order, avoiding stacks of identical pages. In bookbinding, the term describes the structural formula of a volume, detailing the number and arrangement of signatures (folded sheets) to verify completeness and detect missing leaves. In scholarly editing, collation entails aligning variant versions of a text to identify differences and reconstruct an authoritative edition, a practice essential to fields like classical studies and bibliography. These diverse applications underscore collation's foundational role in organizing information for accessibility and accuracy.

Principles of Ordering

Numerical and Chronological Ordering

Numerical ordering in collation refers to the process of comparing strings by interpreting them as mathematical values rather than their lexical character sequences, ensuring that the relative magnitude of numbers determines their position in the sorted output. For instance, in a list containing "4", "2.5", and "10", numerical collation would place "4" first, followed by "2.5", and then "10", as these reflect their actual numeric values rather than codepoint-based comparisons where "10" might precede "2.5". This approach is a customization of the Unicode Collation Algorithm (UCA), which by default sorts digits lexicographically but allows tailoring to parse and compare numeric substrings for intuitive human-readable results.
Chronological ordering extends this principle to time-based sequences, where dates or timestamps are sorted according to their temporal progression, often leveraging standardized formats to align lexical and chronological sequences. The ISO 8601 standard, for example, represents dates in the YYYY-MM-DD format, enabling straightforward sorting such that "2023-01-15" precedes "2025-11-10" both numerically and as strings, facilitating efficient organization in databases and archives. This format was developed to promote unambiguous international exchange and machine-readable chronological consistency, avoiding ambiguities in regional date conventions like MM/DD/YYYY.
A key challenge in numerical and chronological ordering arises from partial ordering issues, where different string representations of equivalent values must be distinguished to preserve semantic intent without assuming full equivalence. For example, in contexts like version numbering or precise data logging, "2" and "2.0" may represent the same integer value numerically but differ in precision or format, requiring collation rules to treat them as distinct to avoid unintended merging in sorted outputs. This necessitates hybrid approaches in systems like ICU Collation, where numeric parsing is combined with secondary string comparisons for representations.
Historically, numerical and chronological ordering emerged in early filing systems and calendars to manage records efficiently amid growing administrative demands. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, U.S. government offices, including the State Department around 1910, adopted numerical filing to standardize document retrieval, replacing haphazard arrangements with sequential number assignments for faster access. Similarly, ancient calendars, such as the Egyptian solar calendar from circa 3000 BCE, imposed chronological ordering on events for agricultural and ritual purposes, laying foundational principles for temporal sequencing that influenced modern standards.

Alphabetical Ordering

Alphabetical ordering involves comparing strings character by character based on their positions within an alphabet, such as placing A before B in the Latin script. This letter-by-letter approach determines the sequence by assigning weights to each character, starting from the primary level for base letters, and proceeding to secondary levels for diacritics if needed, ensuring that "role" precedes "roles" due to the additional 's' at the primary level.
Case handling in alphabetical ordering varies by system, but many dictionary conventions treat uppercase and lowercase letters as equivalent in value, allowing "Apple" to file near "apple" without strict precedence. However, in some computational and filing systems, uppercase letters precede lowercase ones based on ASCII values, resulting in "Apple" sorting before "banana" because 'A' (code 65) comes before 'b' (code 98).
Language-specific rules adapt alphabetical ordering to account for digraphs, ligatures, and modified letters unique to each script. In Spanish, the letter is treated as a distinct character positioned after 'n' but before 'o', while digraphs like "ch" and "ll"once considered separate letters until their 1994 reclassification and 2010 exclusion from the alphabetare now sorted letter-by-letter as 'c' followed by 'h' (after "ce" but before "ci") and 'l' followed by 'l' (after "li" but before "lo"), respectively. In French, accented letters like follow their base form 'e' in primary ordering, with diacritics evaluated at the secondary level in a tailored sequence that often places acute accents () after unaccented e but considers grave accents () in dictionary-specific backward weighting for precision. Ligatures such as in French are typically expanded to "oe" for collation, ensuring "coeur" sorts after "cur" if accents are secondary.
Abbreviations and punctuation are frequently ignored or treated as separators to simplify ordering, preventing disruptions from non-letter characters. Spaces and hyphens serve as element dividers, while periods in abbreviations like "St." are disregarded, filing "St. Louis" under "S" as if it were "Saint Louis." In English word lists, this results in "U.S.A." sorting under "U" after ignoring the periods.
Examples from major languages illustrate these principles: In English dictionaries, "cat" precedes "dog" via primary letter comparison, with case-insensitive filing placing "Cat" adjacent to "cat." French lists order "cote" before "cte" (unaccented before accented) and "te" after "ete" but before "fte," reflecting secondary diacritic weighting. Spanish dictionaries place "nacin" after "nada" but before "oasis" due to 's position, and "chico" after "cebra" but before "cima" under letter-by-letter digraph treatment.

Specialized Sorting Methods

Root-Based Sorting

Root-based sorting is a collation method used primarily in dictionaries of Semitic languages, where entries are organized by shared consonantal rootstypically triliteral sequences of consonants that form the core semantic unitrather than by the full spelled-out words. For instance, in Arabic, words derived from the root k-t-b (), such as kitb (book) and kataba (he wrote), are grouped together under the root entry, with subentries arranged by vowel patterns or affixes. This approach prioritizes morphological structure over linear alphabetical sequences, contrasting briefly with standard alphabetical ordering in non-Semitic scripts.
A prominent historical example is Hans Wehr's A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, first published in German in 1952 with English editions appearing by 1961, which employs roots as the primary sort keys followed by form patterns. In this dictionary, roots are listed in a modified alphabetical order based on their consonants, enabling users to locate related derivations systematically.
This method extends to other Semitic languages, such as Hebrew, where standard lexicons like the Brown-Driver-Briggs Hebrew and English Lexicon arrange entries by triliteral roots to reflect etymological families. Similarly, in Amharic, dictionaries including Grover Hudson's A Students Amharic-English, English-Amharic Dictionary (1994) and the Kane Amharic-English Dictionary organize words by roots when applicable, following the Ethiopic syllabary for root sequencing.
The advantages of root-based sorting lie in its ability to reveal etymological and semantic connections among words, facilitating deeper understanding for language learners and researchers by grouping morphologically related terms. This organization highlights the templatic morphology of Semitic languages, where a single root can generate dozens of forms across grammatical categories.

Radical-and-Stroke Sorting

Radical-and-stroke sorting is a hierarchical method employed in East Asian writing systems to order logographic characters, primarily by identifying a semantic or graphic component known as the radical, followed by the number of strokes in the remaining portion of the character. This approach facilitates dictionary lookup and collation for scripts like Chinese hanzi, Japanese kanji, and Korean hanja, where characters do not follow phonetic alphabets. The radical serves as the primary key, often hinting at the character's meaning, while the residual stroke count provides the secondary sorting criterion, ensuring a systematic arrangement without reliance on linear phonetic sequences.
In the Chinese system, characters are decomposed such that the radicaltypically the leftmost, topmost, or bottommost componentdetermines the main category, with the total stroke count minus the radical's strokes used for subordering. For instance, the character ("mother") is sorted under the radical (n, meaning "female," 3 strokes), with 3 additional strokes in the remainder (m, "horse"). Similarly, ("good") falls under , followed by 3 strokes in (z, "child"). This method relies on a standardized set of 214 radicals, ordered by their own stroke counts from 1 to 17.
The foundational framework emerged from the Kangxi Dictionary (, Kngx Zdin), commissioned by the Qing emperor Kangxi and completed in 1716, which formalized the 214-radical system drawing from earlier Ming-era works like the Zhengzitong. This dictionary organized approximately 47,000 characters under these radicals, with subentries by residual strokes, establishing a enduring standard for traditional Chinese collation that persists in modern print and digital references. Its influence extends to adaptations in simplified Chinese contexts, where variant radicals are mapped to maintain compatibility.
Japanese kanji dictionaries adopt a parallel structure, classifying characters under one of the 214 Kangxi radicals before sorting by additional strokes, often supplemented by total stroke indices for cross-verification. For example, the character ("read") is indexed under the radical (yn, "speech," 7 strokes), with 7 further strokes in the phonetic component (mi). This method supports efficient lookup in resources like the Dai Kan-Wa Jiten, aligning closely with Chinese traditions while accommodating Japanese-specific readings and usages.
In contemporary digital environments, radical-and-stroke sorting has been integrated into font systems and collation algorithms through the Unicode Standard, which encodes the 214 Kangxi radicals in the range U+2F00U+2FDF and provides radical-stroke indices in the Unihan Database for CJK unified ideographs. This enables consistent machine-readable ordering across Chinese, Japanese, and Korean texts, preserving the method's utility in search engines, databases, and typesetting software.
Korean hanja collation mirrors the radical-and-stroke approach using the same 214 Kangxi radicals, with characters sorted first by radical strokes and then by residuals, though practical dictionaries often integrate this with Hangul phonetic indices for Sino-Korean compounds. This adaptation supports hanja's role in formal nomenclature and etymology, where it coexists with the alphabetic Hangul script without disrupting the logographic ordering.

Collation in Computing

Sort Keys and Algorithms

In computing, collation relies on sort keys, which are binary strings or arrays of integers derived from character codes to enable efficient string comparisons. These keys transform Unicode code points into weighted sequences that reflect linguistic order rather than raw numerical values, allowing binary operations like memcmp for sorting. For example, the character "a" (U+0061) might map to a multi-byte key such as , representing its primary, secondary, and tertiary weights.
The historical evolution of collation mechanisms traces back to the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), standardized in 1963 by the American Standards Association to provide a 7-bit encoding for 128 characters, primarily supporting English text. Early ASCII-based sorting used simple codepoint comparisons, ordering characters by their binary values (e.g., 'A' at 65 precedes 'a' at 97), which sufficed for basic English but failed for multilingual needs. The introduction of Unicode in 1991 initiated a major evolution in character encoding, with the standard growing to encompass 159,801 assigned characters across 172 scripts as of version 17.0 (September 2025), necessitating algorithms beyond codepoint order to ensure culturally appropriate sorting.
The Unicode Collation Algorithm (UCA), specified in Unicode Technical Standard #10, provides a foundational, customizable method for generating these sort keys and performing comparisons. It decomposes strings into collation elementstriplets of weightsand compares them level by level: primary weights for base letter differences (e.g., "a" < "b"), secondary for diacritics (e.g., "" > "e"), and tertiary for case or punctuation (e.g., "A" < "a"). The algorithm is tailorable through modifications to the Default Unicode Collation Element Table (DUCET), allowing reordering of scripts, contractions (e.g., "ch" in Spanish), or level adjustments without altering the core process.
The UCA's main algorithm proceeds in four steps:

Normalization: Canonicalize the input strings to Normalization Form D (NFD), decomposing combined characters (e.g., "" to "e" + combining acute). This ensures consistent element mapping.

Collation Element Generation: Map each grapheme cluster to one or more collation elements from the CET. Simple mappings use a single triplet ; expansions handle ignorables or composites (e.g., "ffi" ligature expands to multiple elements); contractions treat digraphs as units. Elements with zero primary weight are typically ignored at higher levels.

Sort Key Formation: For each level, collect non-ignorable weights into a key array, padding with zeros and optionally processing secondary weights backward for certain languages. The full key concatenates levels: L1 || || L2 || || L3, forming a binary string for comparison.

Comparison: Iterate through keys level by level, stopping at the first differing non-zero weight (L1 first, then L2, etc.). If equal up to the tertiary level, strings are equivalent; higher levels (quaternary) can resolve ties.

In pseudocode, the core comparison resembles:
function compareStrings(s1, s2):
 normalize s1 and s2 to NFD
 ce1 = getCollationElements(s1) // array of triplets
 ce2 = getCollationElements(s2)
 key1 = buildSortKey(ce1) // levels L1, L2, L3 as concatenated weights
 key2 = buildSortKey(ce2)
 for level in 1 to 3:
 if compareLevel(key1, key2) != 0:
 return that result
 return 0 // equal
This outline ensures stability and efficiency, with implementations optimizing for variable-length keys.
Other algorithms build on or contrast with UCA. Simple codepoint sorting, common in pre-Unicode systems, compares raw Unicode scalars (U+0000 to U+10FFFF), which ignores linguistic rules (e.g., "" might precede "b" incorrectly in German). Tailored rules, as in UCA, override this via custom weight assignments. The International Components for Unicode (ICU) library implements UCA with extensions from Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR), generating sort keys as compact byte arrays for high-performance comparisons in applications like databases. ICU supports both default DUCET mappings and rule-based tailoring, enabling binary-safe sorting without full string re-parsing.

Handling Numbers and Special Characters

In collation processes within computing, handling mixed alphanumeric strings presents challenges, particularly with numbers embedded in text. Lexical sorting, the default in many systems, treats digits as characters based on their Unicode code points, leading to counterintuitive results such as "file2.txt" sorting before "file10.txt" because the character '1' precedes '2'. This approach prioritizes string comparison over numerical value, which can disrupt user expectations in applications like file explorers or databases.
Natural sorting addresses these issues by parsing consecutive digits as numerical entities, ensuring "file2.txt" precedes "file10.txt" by evaluating 2 < 10. For instance, in version numbering, natural order places "1.10" before "1.2" to reflect semantic progression, whereas lexical order reverses this due to the shorter length of "1.2". Similarly, labels like "Figure 7b" should appear before "Figure 11a" in natural sorting, requiring algorithms to detect and numerically compare digit sequences while preserving surrounding text. Phone numbers exemplify formatting complications, where variants like "(555) 123-4567" and "555-123-4567" may sort inconsistently in lexical mode unless normalized by removing non-digits for numerical comparison.
Special characters, including punctuation and symbols, introduce further variability in collation. In the Unicode Collation Algorithm (UCA), punctuation such as apostrophes, hyphens, and ampersands is often classified as variable elements with low primary weights, allowing options like "shifted" handling to ignore them at higher levels (L1-L3) and treat them as separators or ignorables. For example, "O'Brien" typically sorts under "O" by ignoring the apostrophe, simulating "OBrien", which aligns with dictionary conventions in English locales. Business names with symbols, like "AT&T" or "3M", may require similar ignorance rules to group them with "AT" or "3" entries, preventing punctuation from elevating them to unexpected positions. Symbols like "@" or "%" in identifiers are handled via quaternary-level distinctions in UCA to break ties without altering primary order.
To resolve these challenges, systems employ custom collators or preprocessing techniques. Tailoring in UCA allows rules to redefine weights for digits and symbols, such as assigning numeric expansions for sequences like "10" to sort before "2". Preprocessing with regular expressions can extract numbers for separate numerical sorting before reintegrating them into the string order, as seen in libraries supporting natural sort. Sort keys, generated from these tailored mappings, provide the foundation for efficient binary comparisons while accommodating such tweaks.
In database systems like SQL Server, collation settings at the instance level affect how data is sorted and compared. When installing a new SQL Server instance for potential future database migrations, it is a best practice to set the collation to match that of the existing instance. This simplifies database transfers via backup/restore or detach/attach methods, avoiding potential collation conflicts.

Advanced Topics in Collation

Multilingual and Locale-Specific Collation

Collation in multilingual contexts requires adaptation to diverse scripts, languages, and cultural conventions to ensure logical and culturally appropriate ordering of text. The Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR), maintained by the Unicode Consortium, plays a central role in defining these locale-specific rules by providing tailored collation data that builds upon the Unicode Collation Algorithm (UCA). This repository includes specifications for hundreds of locales, allowing software to apply rules such as variable weighting for ignorables (e.g., spaces, punctuation) and script reordering to align with local expectations. For instance, CLDR enables distinctions in character equivalence and ordering that reflect linguistic norms, preventing mismatches in sorting across global applications.
Specific examples illustrate CLDR's impact on collation. In German, the umlaut "" is treated as a secondary variant of "a," sorting immediately after "a" rather than at the end with "z," as defined in the German tailoring rules. Similarly, in Turkish, CLDR handles the dotted "i" (U+0069) and dotless "" (U+0131) as distinct primary weights, with their uppercase counterparts "" (U+0130) and "I" (U+0049) following locale-specific case mappings to preserve phonetic differences in sorting. French phone book collation, another CLDR-defined variant, ignores hyphens and apostrophes (using the "alternate=shifted" option) to sort entries like "D'Artagnan" under "D" rather than after all "D" entries, prioritizing readability in directories. In Japanese, collation often relies on pronunciation-based ordering for kana scripts, with romaji (Latin transliteration) as a fallback for mixed-script text, supported by prefix matching rules in CLDR to efficiently handle common readings.
When dealing with interactions between scripts, such as mixing Latin, Cyrillic, and Arabic characters, CLDR leverages UCA defaults to group code points by script blocks for initial ordering, while allowing parametric reordering to prioritize native scripts (e.g., placing Cyrillic before Latin in Russian locales). This ensures cross-script comparisons remain consistent yet adaptable, as UCA assigns primary weights based on script hierarchies to avoid arbitrary placements.
Challenges in multilingual collation include varying reordering needs for different use cases, such as dictionary-style sorting (where accents follow base letters) versus phone book styles (which may suppress them for simplicity), requiring explicit locale variants in CLDR. Additionally, some locales suffer from incomplete coverage, where tailorings are partial or rely on private-use mappings, leading to gaps in support for less common scripts or dialects until community contributions update the repository.

Recent Developments and Standards

In September 2025, Unicode 17.0 was released, adding 4,803 new characters to reach a total of 159,801 encoded characters, including support for four new scripts: Sidetic, Tolong Siki, Beria Erfe, and Tai Yo. These additions necessitate updated collation elements in the Unicode Collation Algorithm (UCA) to handle sorting for the new characters, such as emojis and symbols, ensuring consistent ordering across implementations.
The Unicode Technical Standard #10 (UTS #10), specifying the UCA, was updated to version 17.0 in September 2025. This version includes enhancements for well-formedness criteriasuch as consistent collation levels and unambiguous weight assignmentsand guidance on migration between UCA versions to maintain interoperability in software.
Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR) version 47, released in March 2025, expanded locale data coverage to include core support for languages like Coptic and Haitian Creole, alongside updates for 11 English variants and Cantonese in Macau, contributing to data for over 168 locales across modern, moderate, and basic coverage levels. CLDR version 48, released on October 29, 2025, further added core data for languages such as Buryat (bua), enhancing collation tailoring for diverse languages and facilitating more precise sorting in applications, including AI-assisted database systems that leverage CLDR for locale-aware operations.
Emerging trends in collation emphasize AI integration for dynamic processing, such as real-time locale detection in cloud services to adapt sorting rules on-the-fly for user contexts. In modern databases, PostgreSQL 18, released in September 2025, advanced ICU-based collation support with customizable attributes in language tags and the new pg_unicode_fast provider, offering performance improvements over traditional ICU implementations for multilingual queries in SQL and NoSQL environments.
Post-2023 multilingual expansions have addressed gaps by broadening support for underrepresented languages, thereby improving equitable handling of diverse content in global applications.

References

COLLATION Definition & Meaning - Merriam-Webster

COLLATION | definition in the Cambridge English Dictionary

UTS #10: Unicode Collation Algorithm

Collation and Unicode Support - SQL Server - Microsoft Learn

12.1 Character Sets and Collations in General

What does collate mean when printing? - PaperCut

Book Collecting Basics: What is Collation?

Concepts | ICU Documentation

The Filing Cabinet - Places Journal

Calendars and Chronology in the Ancient World | Research Starters

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Multi_Level_Comparison

 Library of Congress Filing Rules

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Case_Comparisons

 1. Abecedario y uso de las letras - Real Academia Espaola

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Tailoring

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Contextual_Sensitivity

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#French

 Hans WEHR Dictionary of Modern Arabic - ghazali.org

The Hans Wehr Arabic-English dictionary - Darul Tahqiq

Biblical Hebrew: Hebrew Dictionaries / Lexicons - Guides & Help

Review: on JSTOR

Thomas Leiper Kane-Amharic-English Dictionary, Vol. 1 | PDF - Scribd

Kangxi zidian (www.chinaknowledge.de)

Chapter 18 Unicode 16.0.0

None

How to use the Kanji dictionaries / 

Hanja - Korean Wiki Project

Milestones:American Standard Code for Information Interchange ...

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Normalization

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Collation_Elements

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Sort_Key

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Comparison

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr10/#Main_Algorithm

Collation | ICU Documentation

UTS #10: Unicode Collation Algorithm

Collation, sorting, and string comparison - Globalization

Unicode CLDR Project

Unicode 17.0.0

UTS #10: Unicode Collation Algorithm

UTC #180 Agenda - Unicode

CLDR 47 Release Note - Unicode CLDR Project

Documentation: 18: 23.2. Collation Support - PostgreSQL

PostgreSQL 18 just dropped: 10 powerful new features devs need to ...

Arabic and Dozens More Languages Unlock Advanced AI Accessibility

The web is multilingual so why does search still speak just a few ...

Set or change the database collation - SQL Server | Microsoft Learn
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion