Computational economics Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Computational economics
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Computational economics is a methodology for solving economic problems through the application of computing machinery, providing value-added approaches applicable to any branch of economics. It is inherently interdisciplinary, drawing from computer science, applied mathematics, and statistics to enhance economic analysis. This field integrates computational techniques with economic theory to address issues that are often too complex for purely analytical or deductive methods, such as dynamic optimization, equilibrium computations, and stochastic simulations.
The discipline gained significant momentum in the 1990s, driven by rapid advances in computing hardware, software, and numerical algorithms, which enabled economists to explore realistic models beyond simplified assumptions. It was formalized through initiatives like the establishment of the Society for Computational Economics in 1994 and the launch of the journal Computational Economics in 1997, reflecting its growing recognition as an independent area of research. Early contributions, such as the Handbook of Computational Economics (Volume 1, 1996), surveyed foundational numerical methods for solving economic models, including perturbation techniques and value function iteration.
Key methods in computational economics include Monte Carlo simulations for uncertainty analysis, dynamic programming for sequential decision-making, and agent-based modeling for studying emergent behaviors in decentralized systems. Agent-based computational economics (ACE), a prominent subfield, models economies as evolving systems of autonomous, interacting agentsranging from individuals to institutionsto investigate phenomena like market formation, policy impacts, and financial crises without relying on representative-agent assumptions. Applications span macroeconomics (e.g., business cycle analysis), finance (e.g., option pricing), and industrial organization (e.g., auction design), often leveraging tools like MATLAB, Python, or Julia for implementation.
The field's importance lies in its ability to bridge theoretical economics with empirical data, revealing quantitative insights into model behaviors and testing hypotheses in high-dimensional settings. As computational power continues to grow, recent developments incorporate machine learning for pattern recognition in economic data and real-time simulations for policy evaluation, positioning computational economics as essential for understanding complex, data-rich modern economies.

Introduction

Definition and Scope

Computational economics is defined as the application of computational methodssuch as simulations, algorithms, and numerical techniquesto solve economic problems that prove analytically intractable through traditional deductive approaches. This field employs computing machinery to model and analyze complex economic phenomena where closed-form solutions are infeasible, enabling quantitative exploration of theoretical implications.
The scope of computational economics spans theoretical modeling to derive insights from abstract economic structures, empirical analysis to process and interpret large-scale data, and policy evaluation to assess potential outcomes under various scenarios. By harnessing computational power, it addresses challenges involving high dimensionality, nonlinearity, uncertainty, and vast datasets that overwhelm manual or analytical methods.
Computational economics is distinct from econometrics, which centers on statistical inference and estimation from historical data to test hypotheses, whereas computational approaches prioritize the numerical approximation and simulation of forward-looking models. It also differs from experimental economics, which examines human decision-making in controlled laboratory settings, by instead utilizing algorithmic agents to replicate and study emergent economic behaviors in virtual environments.
At its core, computational economics involves discretizing continuous economic models into computable grids or states, applying iterative algorithms to converge on solutions, and rigorously validating results against empirical data or stylized facts to confirm their economic relevance. These elements ensure that approximations remain accurate despite inherent computational trade-offs like error bounds and convergence speed.

Importance and Interdisciplinary Nature

Computational economics has gained prominence by enabling economists to tackle complex problems that defy analytical solutions, such as high-dimensional dynamic models involving heterogeneity and strategic interactions. Traditional economic theory often relies on simplifying assumptions to achieve tractability, but computational methods allow for the exploration of realistic scenarios, including non-equilibrium dynamics and emergent phenomena like market crashes or innovation diffusion. For instance, these approaches facilitate quantitative assessments of policy impacts, revealing insights that qualitative analysis cannot provide, such as the welfare effects of regulatory changes in oligopolistic markets.
The field's importance extends to bridging theoretical predictions with empirical data through calibration and simulation, enhancing the robustness of economic models. By simulating economies as evolving systems, computational economics supports counterfactual analysis and stress-testing of theories, as seen in studies reversing earlier findings on executive compensation through numerical exploration. This has proven vital in areas like macroeconomics and finance, where computational tools quantify the scale of economic fluctuations or the efficiency of monetary policies, providing policymakers with evidence-based guidance.
Interdisciplinarily, computational economics integrates economics with computer science, mathematics, and natural sciences to model adaptive systems. Drawing from agent-oriented programming in computer science, it constructs autonomous agents capable of learning and interaction, while incorporating evolutionary principles from biology and complex adaptive systems from physics to capture real-world heterogeneity and adaptation. This fusion, exemplified in agent-based models, fosters collaboration across disciplines, allowing economists to leverage numerical algorithms for solving optimization problems and simulating social structures that traditional methods overlook.

Historical Development

Early Foundations (Pre-1980s)

The foundations of computational economics trace back to the interwar period and World War II, when operations research emerged as a discipline to address resource allocation challenges in military and industrial contexts. Leonid Kantorovich, a Soviet mathematician, laid early groundwork in 1939 with his development of a linear programming method, outlined in Mathematical Methods in the Organization and Planning of Production, which optimized production processes under resource constraints using multipliers akin to Lagrange methods. This approach formalized the efficient allocation of scarce resources, earning Kantorovich the 1975 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences for contributions to optimum resource allocation theory. Similarly, Tjalling Koopmans advanced these ideas during World War II as a statistician for the British Merchant Shipping Mission, where he solved the Hitchcock transportation problem to minimize shipping costs from supply origins to demand destinations, introducing activity analysis as a precursor to linear programming. Koopmans's work emphasized interpreting input-output relationships in production for efficiency, also recognized in the 1975 Nobel Prize.
In the 1950s and 1960s, the advent of digital computers enabled the practical implementation of these theoretical models, particularly in input-output analysis and econometric simulations. Wassily Leontief's input-output framework, initially conceptualized in the 1930s to model intersectoral dependencies in production, relied on solving large systems of linear equations; by 1949, Leontief utilized Harvard's 25-ton Mark II computer to process extensive data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, marking one of the earliest applications of computing to economic modeling. This computational effort produced the first comprehensive U.S. input-output table, facilitating quantitative analysis of economic interdependencies and earning Leontief the 1973 Nobel Prize for developing the method. Concurrently, econometricians began leveraging computers for simulations, with pioneering efforts at the University of Michigan in the early 1950s using early digital computers to estimate parameters in large-scale models and forecast economic variables. These simulations addressed complex systems intractable by hand, such as multivariate regressions, and by the 1960s, programming digital computers became essential for generating econometric knowledge through iterative numerical solutions.
The 1970s saw the maturation of computable general equilibrium (CGE) models, which integrated Walrasian general equilibrium theory with empirical data to simulate economy-wide policy impacts. Herbert Scarf's 1967 algorithm for computing fixed points in general equilibrium systems provided the computational backbone, enabling the solution of nonlinear equations representing market clearing across sectors. Building on this, economists in the 1970s developed CGE frameworks incorporating production functions, consumer behavior, and trade linkages, often using early numerical methods like Scarf's simplicial approximation to approximate equilibria. These models allowed for policy evaluations, such as tariff effects, by balancing supply and demand under constraints.
Key figures like John von Neumann further influenced these foundations through conceptual innovations in simulation. Von Neumann's 1951 work on cellular automata, detailed in "The General and Logical Theory of Automata," modeled self-reproducing systems via simple local rules on a grid, providing an early paradigm for studying emergent behaviors in complex, decentralized systemsideas that prefigured computational approaches to economic interactions. Complementing this, early numerical methods for solving economic equations, such as George Dantzig's 1947 simplex algorithm for linear programming, enabled iterative optimization of resource allocation problems by traversing feasible regions in high-dimensional spaces. These techniques, along with iterative solvers like Gauss-Seidel for linear systems in input-output models, formed the computational toolkit that bridged theoretical economics with practical simulation before the 1980s.

Key Milestones (1980sPresent)

The 1980s marked a pivotal era in computational economics, driven by the proliferation of microcomputers that democratized access to advanced simulation techniques. These affordable personal computing devices enabled economists to perform extensive Monte Carlo simulations, which involve generating random samples to approximate solutions for complex stochastic models in areas like risk assessment and policy evaluation. Concurrently, the establishment of the Santa Fe Institute in 1984 fostered groundbreaking work on early agent-based models, exploring complex adaptive systems and emergent economic behaviors through computational experiments that simulated interactions among heterogeneous agents.
In the 1990s, computational economics advanced significantly with the integration of parallel computing architectures, which accelerated the solution of large-scale dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models by distributing computational tasks across multiple processors. This era also saw influential contributions from Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott, whose real business cycle models relied heavily on numerical methods and computer simulations to analyze macroeconomic fluctuations, earning them the 2004 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences for pioneering computational approaches in dynamic macroeconomics. A key institutional milestone was the founding of the Society for Computational Economics in 1994, which promoted the adoption of computational methods through conferences, journals, and collaborative networks among researchers.
The 2000s and 2010s ushered in the big data revolution, where the explosion of digital data sourcessuch as transaction records and online behaviorsspurred the adoption of machine learning techniques in economic research for tasks like causal inference and prediction. Seminal works, including those by Susan Athey and Guido Imbens, demonstrated how machine learning algorithms could enhance econometric analysis by handling high-dimensional data without strong parametric assumptions, influencing fields from labor economics to policy design. Open-source and commercial tools like MATLAB further facilitated economic simulations; its toolboxes for econometrics and optimization became staples for implementing DSGE models and agent-based simulations, enabling reproducible research and broader accessibility.
Entering the 2020s, computational economics has increasingly incorporated artificial intelligence (AI) to develop adaptive, data-driven models that capture nonlinear dynamics in economic systems, such as generative AI for forecasting market trends and simulating policy impacts amid uncertainty. As of September 2025, projections indicate that generative AI could increase total factor productivity levels by 1.5% by 2035 in advanced economies through enhanced decision-making tools, with a contribution of 0.01 percentage points to total factor productivity growth in 2025 itself. Parallel explorations in quantum computing have begun targeting economic optimization problems, with early applications in portfolio management and risk modeling leveraging quantum algorithms for faster solutions to combinatorial challenges intractable for classical computers.

Core Concepts and Methods

Computational Modeling Fundamentals

Computational economic modeling relies on transforming theoretical economic frameworks into numerically tractable forms, primarily through discretization techniques that approximate continuous variables. Continuous-time models, which describe economic processes evolving smoothly over time, and continuous-state models, featuring infinite possible values for variables like capital or consumption, are often intractable for direct computation due to their mathematical complexity. Discretization addresses this by converting time into discrete periods (e.g., quarters or years) and state spaces into finite grids, enabling the use of algorithms like finite difference methods or projection techniques to approximate solutions. For instance, in dynamic models of growth, a continuous production function might be evaluated on a grid of capital levels, balancing accuracy against computational cost.
Economic models are broadly categorized by their treatment of uncertainty and temporal structure. Deterministic models assume fixed relationships between inputs and outputs, yielding unique, predictable trajectories without randomness, which simplifies analysis but overlooks real-world variability such as shocks to productivity. In contrast, stochastic models incorporate probabilistic elements, like random disturbances, to capture uncertainty, often using techniques like Monte Carlo simulation for solution. Models also differ in dynamics: equilibrium models focus on steady-state conditions where variables balance unchangingly, while dynamic models trace paths over time, accounting for transitions and adjustments. These distinctions guide model selection, with stochastic dynamic approaches prevalent in macroeconomics for realism.
Ensuring model reliability requires rigorous validation, starting with calibration to align parameters with observed data, such as matching moments like average output growth from historical records. Sensitivity analysis then tests how outputs vary with parameter perturbations, identifying robust findings or fragile assumptions. Out-of-sample testing evaluates predictive accuracy on unseen data, mitigating overfitting and confirming generalizability. These steps, rooted in empirical discipline, enhance credibility, as seen in real business cycle models calibrated to U.S. postwar data.
A cornerstone of dynamic optimization in computational economics is the Bellman equation, which formalizes recursive decision-making. For an agent maximizing utility over capital kkk, it states:
V(k)=maxcu(c)+V(k),
V(k) = \max_{c} \, u(c) + \beta V(k'),
V(k)=cmaxu(c)+V(k),
subject to k=f(k)ck' = f(k) - ck=f(k)c, where u(c)u(c)u(c) is the utility from consumption ccc, \beta is the discount factor, and f(k)f(k)f(k) is the production function determining next-period capital. This equation equates the value of current state to the optimal choice of immediate reward plus discounted future value. Solutions employ value function iteration: begin with an initial guess V0(k)V^0(k)V0(k), compute policy functions to update Vn+1(k)V^{n+1}(k)Vn+1(k) iteratively until convergence to the fixed point V(k)V(k)V(k), often requiring hundreds of iterations for precision in economic applications like growth models.

Algorithmic and Simulation Techniques

Computational economics relies on a variety of algorithmic techniques to solve optimization problems and partial differential equations (PDEs) that arise in economic models. Gradient descent is a fundamental optimization algorithm used to minimize objective functions in these contexts, iteratively updating parameters in the direction of the negative gradient to converge to a local minimum. This method is particularly valuable for handling high-dimensional parameter spaces in dynamic economic models, where traditional analytical solutions are infeasible. For instance, in solving nonlinear regression problems derived from economic dynamics, gradient descent enables efficient approximation of value functions or policy rules.
Finite difference methods provide numerical solutions to PDEs commonly encountered in continuous-time growth models, approximating derivatives by differences on a discrete grid to transform the continuous problem into a solvable algebraic system. These methods are essential for modeling heterogeneous agent economies or income distribution dynamics, where PDEs describe the evolution of wealth or consumption distributions over time. By discretizing the state space and applying schemes like explicit or implicit finite differences, researchers can simulate long-run growth paths and assess policy impacts with high accuracy.
Simulation techniques play a central role in addressing uncertainty and computing expectations in economic models. Monte Carlo methods estimate expectations by generating random draws from probability distributions and averaging function evaluations, providing robust approximations for integrals that lack closed-form solutions. The core idea is to approximate the expectation $ E $ as $ \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^N g(x_i) $, where $ x_i $ are independent random samples from the distribution of $ X $, and convergence is checked by monitoring the variance of the estimates or using confidence intervals as $ N $ increases. This approach is widely applied in computational economics to quantify uncertainty in stochastic growth or asset pricing models, allowing for the incorporation of complex shock distributions. Bootstrapping complements Monte Carlo by resampling empirical data to estimate the distribution of statistics, enabling inference in models with unknown underlying distributions without parametric assumptions. In econometric applications, it resamples observations with replacement to construct bias-corrected estimators or confidence bands for regression coefficients.
To handle the computational demands of large-scale simulations, parallel computing frameworks leverage graphics processing units (GPUs) for massive parallelism, distributing workloads across thousands of cores to accelerate matrix operations and iterative solvers. In economic simulations, GPUs enable rapid evaluation of expectations or policy functions over expansive state spaces, reducing solution times from days to hours for models with millions of grid points. This is achieved through libraries like CUDA, which facilitate the parallel execution of Monte Carlo draws or finite difference iterations.

Specific Modeling Approaches

Agent-Based Modeling

Agent-based modeling (ABM) in computational economics represents a bottom-up approach to simulating economic systems as decentralized networks of heterogeneous agents that interact within an artificial environment, following simple behavioral rules to generate complex, emergent outcomes. This methodology, often termed agent-based computational economics (ACE), treats economic processes as open-ended dynamic systems where individual agentssuch as consumers, firms, or tradersmake decisions based on local information, leading to aggregate phenomena without relying on centralized equilibrium assumptions. Unlike traditional models that aggregate behaviors, ABM emphasizes the role of agent heterogeneity, stochasticity, and adaptive interactions in driving economic dynamics.
Key components of ABM include the agents themselves, their decision rules, the shared environment, and the emergent properties arising from interactions. Agents operate with bounded rationality, incorporating learning and adaptation mechanisms, such as updating strategies based on past experiences or evolutionary selection processes. For instance, agent rules might involve heuristic search or reinforcement learning to adjust behaviors in response to environmental feedback, while the environment provides the spatial or market structure for interactions like trading or information exchange. Emergence occurs when these micro-level interactions produce macro-level patterns, such as market crashes triggered by cascading individual panic selling or the spontaneous formation of economic networks from localized trades.
Representative examples illustrate ABM's application to specific economic questions. In simulations of wealth inequality, agents accumulate resources through production and exchange rules, revealing how initial conditions and interaction topologies can lead to persistent disparities, as seen in models where trade networks amplify wealth concentration among a small group of agents. Similarly, for innovation diffusion, agents adopt new technologies via social learning or imitation, demonstrating how network effects and threshold behaviors spread innovations unevenly across populations, mirroring real-world patterns of technological adoption in markets.
Validation of ABMs typically involves empirical calibration and comparison to observed stylized facts, ensuring that simulated outcomes align with key economic regularities. For example, models are tested against power-law distributions in firm sizes, where ABMs reproduce the empirical observation that a few large firms dominate while many small ones exist, validating the approach through goodness-of-fit metrics like Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests on generated distributions. However, ABM faces criticisms from mainstream economics regarding difficulties in interpreting simulation dynamics, generalizing results beyond specific setups, and limited acceptance in top journals due to perceived lack of theoretical rigor compared to equilibrium-based models. A common mechanism for agent adaptation in such validations is replicator dynamics, which governs the evolution of strategy proportions in populations of interacting agents:
xi=xi(fif)
\dot{x}_i = x_i (f_i - \bar{f})
xi=xi(fif)
Here, xix_ixi denotes the proportion of agents using strategy iii, fif_ifi is the fitness (e.g., payoff) of that strategy, and f\bar{f}f is the average fitness across all strategies, allowing successful behaviors to proliferate over time in economic simulations.
As of 2025, recent developments in ABM include integration with large language models to create more adaptive and realistic agent behaviors, enhancing simulations of complex interactions, and growing adoption by central banks for policy analysis and stress testing. 

Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) Models

Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models represent a class of macroeconomic frameworks that combine microeconomic foundations with stochastic disturbances to simulate and forecast economic fluctuations. These models assume that economic agents, typically represented by a single household and firm, optimize their behavior under rational expectations, leading to a general equilibrium where markets clear dynamically over time. Shocks, such as exogenous changes in technology productivity or monetary policy rates, drive deviations from the steady state, allowing the models to replicate business cycle patterns observed in data.
The core structure of DSGE models builds on representative agent optimization, where the household maximizes lifetime utility subject to a budget constraint, and the firm maximizes profits given a production function, often featuring nominal rigidities in the New Keynesian variant. Rational expectations imply that agents form forecasts based on all available information, ensuring consistency between individual decisions and aggregate outcomes. Key shocks include total factor productivity disturbances, which affect supply-side dynamics, and monetary policy innovations, which influence demand through interest rate adjustments. This setup enables the analysis of how policy interventions propagate through the economy.
To solve these nonlinear systems, DSGE models are typically log-linearized around the non-stochastic steady state, transforming the equations into a linear form that preserves local dynamics while enhancing computational tractability. This approximation facilitates the derivation of impulse response functions and variance decompositions to shocks. The resulting linear rational expectations system is then solved using methods like the Blanchard-Kahn approach, which decomposes the model into stable and unstable components to ensure a unique bounded solution exists; specifically, the number of unstable eigenvalues must equal the number of non-predetermined (jump) variables for saddle-point stability.
A foundational equation in the basic New Keynesian DSGE model is the Euler equation for consumption, which links current and expected future consumption to the real interest rate:
ct=Et
c_t^{-\sigma} = \beta E_t \left
ct=Et
Here, ctc_tct denotes consumption at time ttt, >0\sigma > 0>0 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion (inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution), (0,1)\beta \in (0,1)(0,1) is the subjective discount factor, EtE_tEt is the rational expectations operator conditional on time-ttt information, and rt+1r_{t+1}rt+1 is the real interest rate between periods ttt and t+1t+1t+1. This equation reflects the representative household's first-order condition for optimal saving and consumption smoothing, balancing marginal utility today against expected discounted marginal utility tomorrow adjusted for the opportunity cost of saving. The Blanchard-Kahn technique solves the full model by stacking such Euler equations with others (e.g., for labor supply and Phillips curve) into a state-space representation, iterating forward for jump variables like prices while iterating backward for predetermined states like capital.
Despite their prominence, DSGE models face criticism for assuming a representative agent, which abstracts from heterogeneity in preferences, endowments, and behaviors across households and firms, potentially understating inequality and distributional effects in policy analysis. The 2008 global financial crisis exposed limitations in capturing financial amplification mechanisms, prompting refinements that integrate banking sectors through models of financial intermediaries subject to balance sheet constraints and leverage limits. These extensions, such as incorporating credit spreads and bank capital requirements, allow DSGE models to better simulate how financial shocks propagate to the real economy, improving their relevance for stress testing and prudential policy evaluation. Post-2020 updates have further addressed challenges from the COVID-19 pandemic by incorporating unusual shocks like health-related wedges and news about recovery paths, while advancements in fat-tailed distributions better capture extreme events and behavioral expectations replace strict rational expectations to model boundedly rational forecasting. 

Machine Learning in Economics

Machine learning has emerged as a powerful tool in economics for handling high-dimensional data, improving predictive accuracy, and enabling causal inference in complex environments where traditional econometric methods may falter due to assumptions like linearity or low dimensionality. By leveraging algorithms that learn patterns from data without relying on predefined functional forms, economists can analyze vast datasets from sources such as transaction records, social media, or satellite imagery to forecast economic outcomes or identify behavioral regularities. This integration addresses key challenges in economic research, such as overfitting in predictive models and bias in causal estimation, while complementing classical approaches through flexible, data-driven techniques.
Supervised learning techniques, such as regression trees, have been applied to predict demand in economic settings by partitioning data based on features like price, income, and seasonality to estimate heterogeneous responses. For instance, random forests, an ensemble of regression trees, enhance prediction stability and have been used to model consumer demand curves from scanner data, outperforming linear models in capturing nonlinearities. Unsupervised learning methods, including clustering algorithms like k-means, facilitate market segmentation by grouping consumers or firms into homogeneous clusters based on unobserved patterns in spending or production data, aiding in targeted policy design or pricing strategies. Reinforcement learning, which optimizes sequential decision-making through trial-and-error interactions, supports policy evaluation by simulating agent behaviors in dynamic environments, such as optimizing resource allocation under uncertainty.
A key adaptation in economics is Double Machine Learning (Double ML), which combines machine learning with econometric principles to estimate causal effects while mitigating overfitting and bias from nuisance parameters. In Double ML, two stages of machine learningfirst for nuisance functions like propensity scores, then for the outcome modelenable robust inference on treatment effects in high-dimensional settings, as formalized in the partially linear model where the causal parameter 0\theta_00 is identified via orthogonalization. This approach has been pivotal in applications requiring valid inference, such as evaluating policy interventions. Lasso regularization exemplifies such adaptations for variable selection in high-dimensional economic data:
^=argminyX2+1
\hat{\beta} = \arg\min_{\beta} \| y - X\beta \|^2 + \lambda \| \beta \|_1
^=argminyX2+1
Here, the L1 penalty 1\lambda \| \beta \|_11 shrinks irrelevant coefficients to zero, selecting sparse models that interpret economic relationships, such as identifying key predictors of firm productivity from thousands of covariates.
Practical examples illustrate these techniques' impact. Machine learning models, including natural language processing for text data, have predicted U.S. recessions by extracting sentiment from news articles and financial reports, achieving higher accuracy than traditional indicators like yield spreads. In auction design, reinforcement learning algorithms optimize bidding strategies in spectrum or ad auctions, approximating equilibrium outcomes and improving revenue efficiency over heuristic rules. These applications underscore machine learning's role in enhancing economic foresight and mechanism design. As of 2025, generative AI and large language models are increasingly applied in economics for simulating policy scenarios and assessing environmental, social, and governance factors, with projections indicating AI could affect 40% of global jobs and boost GDP by $7 trillion. 

Applications

Macroeconomic Analysis

Computational economics employs dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models and computable general equilibrium (CGE) models to simulate aggregate economic phenomena, such as business cycles, long-term growth, and responses to policy interventions, enabling economists to evaluate the economy-wide effects of shocks and reforms. These methods integrate microeconomic foundations with stochastic processes to capture how macroeconomic variables like output, inflation, and employment evolve over time under uncertainty. By solving systems of nonlinear equations numerically, computational macroeconomics provides a framework for testing theoretical predictions against historical data and forecasting policy outcomes.
In monetary policy analysis, DSGE models are extensively used by central banks, including the Federal Reserve, to assess the transmission of interest rate changes and quantify their impacts on inflation and output gaps. For instance, the Smets-Wouters DSGE model, estimated on U.S. data, incorporates nominal rigidities and real frictions to evaluate how monetary shocks propagate through the economy, informing decisions on interest rate paths. Similarly, CGE models simulate trade shocks by tracing adjustments in production, consumption, and trade balances across sectors, as seen in analyses of tariff changes or regional trade agreements that reveal welfare effects and resource reallocations.
Case studies highlight the practical utility of these approaches; during the COVID-19 pandemic, DSGE models were adapted to incorporate health-related shocks and fiscal responses. For climate change, integrated CGE frameworks project that a 2C warming could reduce global GDP by approximately 1-2% by 2100, primarily via productivity losses in agriculture and labor supply disruptions in vulnerable regions.
Computational challenges arise in handling nonlinearities, particularly in fiscal multipliers, where standard linear DSGE approximations fail to capture state-dependent effects like zero lower bound constraints, requiring global solution methods that increase dimensionality and estimation complexity. Key metrics in these analyses include impulse response functions (IRFs), which trace the dynamic paths of variables like GDP and inflation following a unit shock, such as a productivity disturbance, revealing peak impacts and persistence for example, a monetary policy tightening might contract output by 0.5% at its trough before gradual recovery.

Microeconomic and Behavioral Studies

Computational economics employs agent-based modeling (ABM) to simulate microeconomic phenomena such as labor markets and bargaining processes, where individual agents interact to reveal emergent market dynamics. In labor market simulations, agents representing workers and firms engage in search, matching, and wage negotiations, often incorporating realistic frictions like information asymmetries and social networks. For instance, the WorkSim model calibrates agent interactions to replicate gross flows between employment, unemployment, and inactivity in the French labor market. Similarly, endogenous preferential matching models show that boundedly rational agents, using simple decision rules rather than full optimization, lead to persistent heterogeneity in job outcomes due to coordination failures and shirking behaviors.
Bargaining in these ABM frameworks extends to computational game theory applications, particularly in auctions, where agents bid strategically under incomplete information. Seminal work using zero-intelligence (ZI) agents in double auctions reveals that market efficiency arises primarily from institutional rules rather than agent sophistication, as even non-strategic bidders achieve near-optimal allocations. In Treasury auction simulations, reinforcement learning agents adapt bidding strategies, illustrating how discriminatory versus uniform pricing rules influence revenue and bidder participation, with outcomes sensitive to learning speeds and market thickness. These models highlight microeconomic inefficiencies, such as the winner's curse, where overbidding due to optimistic biases reduces participant welfare.
Behavioral integration in computational economics incorporates bounded rationality through heuristics, deviating from classical assumptions of perfect foresight. Agents employ simple rules like "satisficing" or social mimicry, as in evolutionary programming approaches that evolve decision strategies over time to approximate real-world cognition. For example, simulating herding in consumer choices, agents copy popular options based on observed behaviors, leading to path-dependent market shares and reduced variety in product adoption. Network effects in trade simulations further amplify this, where agents in interconnected graphs propagate preferences, resulting in clustered adoption patterns that favor incumbents and hinder innovation diffusion.
Such models uncover emergent inefficiencies from cognitive biases, including the formation of speculative bubbles in micro settings like consumer durables markets. When agents exhibit overconfidence or anchoring heuristics, simulated interactions generate price deviations from fundamentals, culminating in booms and crashes driven by collective irrationality rather than external shocks. These outcomes underscore how bounded rationality fosters market fragility, emphasizing the need for policy interventions like information disclosure to mitigate biases.

Financial and Policy Simulations

Computational economics plays a pivotal role in financial simulations by employing Monte Carlo methods to price options, which involve generating numerous random paths for underlying asset prices to estimate expected payoffs under risk-neutral measures. This approach, pioneered by Boyle in 1977, enables the valuation of complex derivatives where closed-form solutions are unavailable, such as path-dependent options, by averaging discounted payoffs across simulated scenarios. In banking, systemic risk models integrate stress testing through agent-based or network simulations to assess how shocks propagate across institutions, capturing interdependencies like credit exposures and liquidity spillovers. For instance, frameworks developed by the Federal Reserve use integrated micro-macro models to evaluate the resilience of major U.S. banks under adverse economic conditions, revealing potential capital shortfalls during crises.
A key metric in these financial applications is Value-at-Risk (VaR), computed via Monte Carlo simulations to quantify potential portfolio losses at a given confidence level over a specified horizon, often by sampling from multivariate distributions of risk factors. Efficient implementations, such as those using importance sampling, reduce computational demands while maintaining accuracy for large portfolios with nonlinear instruments. In policy simulations, agent-based models serve as virtual laboratories to trial interventions like universal basic income (UBI), where heterogeneous agents interact in labor and consumption markets to reveal distributional effects and macroeconomic feedbacks. Simulations of UBI scenarios, for example, demonstrate reduced poverty but potential labor supply distortions, as explored in models linking agent decisions to income transfers.
Machine learning enhances policy impact evaluation by refining causal inference in simulated environments, such as double machine learning for estimating treatment effects from observational data. Specific examples include agent-based simulations of cryptocurrency market volatility, which model trader behaviors and network effects to forecast extreme price swings under regulatory changes up to 2025, aiding risk management for decentralized finance. Similarly, policy labs simulate carbon tax effects using integrated assessment models, where agents adapt production and consumption to carbon pricing, projecting emission reductions alongside economic costs under frameworks like the EU's 2025-2030 targets. These simulations highlight trade-offs, such as emission reductions balanced against modest GDP impacts.

Tools and Implementation

Programming Languages and Environments

Computational economics relies on programming languages that balance computational efficiency, ease of use, and integration with specialized tools for economic modeling. Key languages include Python, Julia, MATLAB, and R, each offering distinct advantages for tasks such as simulations, econometric analysis, and optimization.
Python stands out for its versatility in machine learning applications and economic simulations, supported by libraries like NumPy for array operations and SciPy for scientific computing, which enable efficient handling of large datasets and numerical methods common in economic models. Julia excels in high-performance computing for solving dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models, providing speeds comparable to C while maintaining the syntax simplicity of higher-level languages, as demonstrated in implementations by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. MATLAB is widely used for matrix-based operations in econometrics, offering built-in toolboxes for time series analysis, regression, and forecasting that streamline econometric workflows. R serves as a primary environment for statistical computing in economics, with robust capabilities for data manipulation, visualization, and inferential statistics tailored to empirical economic research.
Selection of these languages in computational economics often hinges on criteria such as execution speed, ease of parallelization for handling complex simulations, and availability of domain-specific libraries that reduce development time for economic algorithms. For instance, Julia's just-in-time compilation facilitates parallel processing on multicore systems, ideal for computationally intensive tasks like agent-based models, while Python's ecosystem supports distributed computing through extensions.
Interactive environments enhance productivity in economic modeling. Jupyter notebooks provide a flexible platform for iterative development, allowing economists to combine code, visualizations, and explanatory text in a single document, which is particularly useful for prototyping simulations and sharing reproducible research.
To illustrate, the following Python code snippet simulates a basic Solow growth model, where capital evolves according to $ k_{t+1} = s y_t + (1 - \delta) k_t $ with output $ y_t = k_t^\alpha $, using NumPy for array operations over time periods.
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# Parameters
alpha = 0.3 # Capital share
s = 0.2 # Savings rate
delta = 0.1 # Depreciation rate
k0 = 0.1 # Initial capital
T = 100 # Time periods

# Simulation
k = np.zeros(T + 1)
k = k0
for t in range(T):
 y = k**alpha
 k = s * y + (1 - delta) * k

# Plot
plt.plot(k)
plt.xlabel('Time')
plt.ylabel('Capital per worker')
plt.title('Solow Growth Model Simulation')
plt.show()
This structure highlights Python's role in straightforward economic simulations, computing steady-state convergence without advanced optimization.

Software Libraries and Frameworks

Dynare is a widely used open-source software platform designed specifically for solving, simulating, and estimating dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models in economics. It supports Bayesian estimation techniques for DSGE, vector autoregression (VAR), and hybrid DSGE-VAR models, enabling economists to handle complex macroeconomic models with features like optimal policy computation and sensitivity analysis. Developed initially at CEPREMAP by Michel Juillard in 1994, Dynare integrates seamlessly with MATLAB, Octave, or Julia, facilitating model specification through a domain-specific language that abstracts away numerical solver details.
NetLogo serves as a programmable modeling environment tailored for agent-based modeling (ABM) in computational economics, allowing users to simulate interactions among heterogeneous agents to study emergent economic phenomena such as market dynamics or policy impacts. Its multi-agent programming paradigm supports rapid prototyping of models where agents follow simple rules, making it accessible for exploring micro-to-macro transitions in economic systems. NetLogo's built-in library includes extensions for economic applications, and its open-source nature has led to community-contributed models for topics like wealth distribution and innovation diffusion.
In the realm of machine learning applications for economics, scikit-learn provides a robust Python library for implementing supervised and unsupervised algorithms, such as regression, clustering, and classification, to analyze economic data like forecasting demand or detecting anomalies in financial time series. Economists leverage scikit-learn for tasks including causal inference and high-dimensional econometrics, where it integrates with economic datasets to improve prediction accuracy over traditional methods in areas like labor economics. Its emphasis on scikit-learn's consistent API enables reproducible workflows for economic ML pipelines, from feature selection to model evaluation.
QuantEcon offers open-source libraries in both Python and Julia, focused on quantitative economic modeling for educational and research purposes, including tools for solving dynamic programming problems and stochastic simulations central to computational economics. The Python version supports lectures on topics like linear algebra applications in economics and Markov processes, while the Julia counterpart emphasizes high-performance computing for advanced models such as real business cycle analysis. These libraries promote pedagogical clarity by providing pre-built solvers and visualization tools, aiding in the dissemination of computational methods.
The General Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS) is a high-level modeling framework for formulating and solving large-scale optimization problems in economics, particularly for linear, nonlinear, and mixed-integer programming in resource allocation and equilibrium analysis. In economic contexts, GAMS excels at multi-sectoral models like computable general equilibrium (CGE) simulations, where it interfaces with solvers to optimize welfare or trade policies under constraints. Its algebraic syntax allows economists to express models declaratively, separating formulation from solution algorithms.
Integration of libraries enhances computational economics workflows; for instance, combining Pandas for data manipulation with scikit-learn enables efficient economic data pipelines, from cleaning time-series datasets to feeding them into ML models for tasks like econometric forecasting. This synergy supports scalable analysis, such as processing macroeconomic indicators before applying regression techniques, reducing preprocessing overhead in research.
Open-source trends in computational economics software have accelerated accessibility, with platforms like QuantEcon and Dynare fostering collaborative development and free distribution, thereby lowering barriers for global researchers to adopt advanced tools without proprietary costs. Cloud-based options, such as Google Colab, further democratize implementation by providing browser-based Jupyter environments for running economic models, including QuantEcon lectures and simulations, without local installations. This shift supports remote collaboration and rapid experimentation in fields like policy simulation.

Publications and Community

Major Journals

The field of computational economics has several prominent peer-reviewed journals that specialize in or significantly feature research at the intersection of computational methods and economic analysis. These outlets emphasize rigorous, reproducible computational approaches, distinguishing them from traditional economics journals that prioritize analytical theory over simulation and algorithmic implementation.
One of the leading journals is the Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control (JEDC), published by Elsevier since its inception in 1979. It focuses on theoretical and empirical studies of economic dynamics, control theory, and computational techniques for modeling complex systems, including agent-based simulations and numerical solutions to dynamic optimization problems. With an h-index of 106 and an impact factor of 2.3 as of 2025, JEDC has played a pivotal role in advancing simulation-based research since the 1980s, when computational power began enabling more sophisticated dynamic models.
Another key publication is Computational Economics, the official journal of the Society for Computational Economics, published by Springer since 1988. This multidisciplinary outlet integrates computational science with economics, covering topics such as algorithmic modeling, optimization, and empirical simulations across micro- and macroeconomics. It boasts an h-index of 51 and an impact factor of 2.2 in 2025, reflecting its growth alongside the field's expansion in the late 20th century, particularly with the rise of accessible computing tools.
The International Journal of Computational Economics and Econometrics, launched by Inderscience in 2009, complements these by emphasizing computational and econometric methods for economic forecasting, policy analysis, and data-driven inference. It prioritizes innovative applications of algorithms in econometrics, with a scope that includes high-dimensional data processing and simulation-based inference, contributing to the field's archival literature on practical computational tools.
These journals have evolved since the 1980s to support the shift from purely theoretical economics toward computationally intensive research, with h-index metrics indicating sustained influenceJEDC's at 106 underscoring its foundational status. Their peer-review processes ensure emphasis on verifiable code, data, and results, setting them apart from theory-centric venues like the American Economic Review.
By 2025, these publications show increasing integration of machine learning and big data techniques, with growing numbers of articles on AI-driven economic modeling and large-scale datasets, reflecting broader trends in handling non-linear dynamics and real-time policy simulations. For instance, recent issues feature applications of neural networks for econometric prediction and big data analytics for macroeconomic forecasting.

Conferences and Professional Organizations

The Society for Computational Economics (SCE), founded in 1994, serves as the primary professional organization dedicated to advancing computational methods in economics and finance. It promotes research encompassing numerical methods, artificial intelligence, simulation techniques, large-scale computing, programming languages, software libraries, and economic databases, fostering collaboration among economists, computer scientists, and related fields. Membership in the SCE provides access to resources, networking opportunities, and participation in events that support career development and funding pursuits in computational economics.
The SCE organizes the annual International Conference on Computing in Economics and Finance (CEF), a key event that attracts 300-400 participants and covers computational aspects of economics, finance, decision-making, and interdisciplinary applications. This conference features presentations on topics such as game theory, regional science, operations research, numerical analysis, and statistics, with program structures designed to reflect members' research interests. Complementing the CEF, the Computational Economics Workshop series, including events like the International Workshop of Computational Economics and Econometrics (IWCEE), focuses on specialized sessions for discussing innovative data sources, computational advances, and interdisciplinary tools.
These gatherings emphasize workshops on practical tools, such as software implementation and simulation modeling, alongside networking sessions that connect researchers with funding opportunities from academic institutions and grants. The SCE's activities also include prizes and contests to recognize outstanding contributions, enhancing community engagement.
With a global footprint, SCE conferences rotate locations across hemispheres, including recent events in Singapore (2024), Nice (France, 2023), Dallas (USA, 2022), virtual (2021), alongside earlier meetings in Ottawa (Canada, 2019) and Warsaw (Poland, 2020, cancelled). Post-2020, the organization adapted to the COVID-19 pandemic by shifting to virtual formats, such as the fully online 27th CEF in 2021, enabling broader international participation from Europe, the United States, Asia, and beyond.

Challenges and Future Directions

Current Limitations and Criticisms

Computational economics faces significant limitations in handling high-dimensional models, where the curse of dimensionality leads to exponentially increasing computational costs, often requiring vast resources that constrain scalability and real-time applications. For instance, sparse high-dimensional regression models in economic forecasting demand advanced optimization techniques to manage parameter proliferation, yet even these can become prohibitive without substantial computing infrastructure. This issue is exacerbated in agent-based models, which simulate heterogeneous agents and interactions, necessitating intensive processing power that limits accessibility for researchers without high-performance computing access.
A related challenge is the black-box nature of complex simulations, particularly in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models, where intricate numerical solutions obscure underlying mechanisms and hinder interpretability. Heavy computational demands in these models, such as those incorporating household heterogeneity and incomplete markets, contribute to this opacity, making it difficult for policymakers and academics to trace how inputs translate to outputs. Such limitations reduce trust in simulation results and complicate classroom or policy adoption.
Critics argue that computational economics over-relies on restrictive assumptions, as seen in DSGE frameworks that assume rational expectations and representative agents, failing to incorporate nonlinear dynamics or financial frictions adequately. Reproducibility remains a persistent issue, with inadequate documentation, non-standardized code practices, and environment dependencies leading to failures in replicating computational results, despite calls for integrated tools like open-source software. Ethical concerns arise from biases in machine learning applications for economic predictions, where dataset selection biasessuch as noise from crowdsourced datadistort models of decision-making, potentially perpetuating inequalities in forecasts. Additionally, unequal access to advanced simulation tools raises equity issues, as resource-intensive models disadvantage researchers in underfunded institutions or developing regions.
These limitations were starkly evident in the 2008 financial crisis, where DSGE models failed to anticipate the event due to their neglect of shadow banking growth, excessive leverage, and rollover risks, relying instead on data from eras with minimal financial disturbances. This predictive shortfall underscored broader criticisms of the field's inability to model rare, systemic shocks effectively.

Emerging Trends and Innovations

One prominent trend in computational economics involves the integration of agent-based modeling (ABM) with machine learning (ML) techniques to create hybrid models that enhance predictive accuracy and adaptability in simulating complex economic behaviors. These hybrid approaches leverage ABM's ability to represent heterogeneous agents and emergent phenomena while using ML to infer agent rules from data or optimize model parameters, addressing limitations in traditional econometric methods. For instance, ML-assisted ABM has been applied to study economic inequality and market dynamics, enabling more realistic simulations of policy impacts without assuming rational expectations.
Another emerging trend is the use of blockchain technology to facilitate decentralized simulations, allowing secure, distributed computation of economic models across networks without central authority. Blockchain enables tamper-proof ledgers for tracking agent interactions in simulations, particularly useful for modeling peer-to-peer economies or supply chains, where trust and verifiability are critical. Research models blockchain-enabled economic networks as stochastic dynamical systems, incorporating elements like token economies to analyze growth and incentives.
Innovations in quantum algorithms are showing promise for solving large-scale optimization problems in economics, with theoretical models from the early 2020s demonstrating potential economic advantages over classical methods in scenarios like portfolio optimization. Quantum approaches, such as variational quantum eigensolvers, have been proposed for resource allocation, offering speedups in combinatorial complexity where classical computers struggle. Concurrently, explainable AI (XAI) is advancing policy transparency by providing interpretable insights into computational economic models, allowing policymakers to understand decision drivers in simulations of fiscal or monetary policies. Frameworks for XAI in economic modeling emphasize post-hoc explanations and feature attribution to demystify black-box predictions, fostering accountability in algorithmic governance.
Sustainability efforts in computational economics focus on green computing practices to minimize the environmental footprint of resource-intensive simulations, such as those involving massive parallel processing for macroeconomic forecasting. Principles like energy-aware algorithm design and efficient hardware utilization have been proposed to reduce carbon emissions from data centers running economic models, with studies indicating potential energy savings of 25% to 50% in computational workflows without sacrificing accuracy. By 2025, advances in federated learning have enabled privacy-preserving analysis of economic data, where models are trained collaboratively across decentralized institutionssuch as banks or governmentswithout sharing sensitive raw data, thus complying with regulations like GDPR while improving forecasts for inflation or trade. This approach has been particularly impactful in fintech, where it safeguards personally identifiable information during collaborative risk assessments. As of 2025, frameworks for AI governance in economic modeling have emerged to address ethical AI use in simulations.

References

(PDF) What Is Computational Economics? - ResearchGate

 Computational Economics and Economic Theory: Substitutes or ...

What is computational economics? - Boston College

 Agent-Based Computational Economics: Overview and Brief History1

Computational Economics - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

Aims and scope | Computational Economics

Computational Economics - General Announcements - Rice University

How Economists Can Get Alife: Abbreviated Version

 An Investigation into Numerical Solutions to Discrete- & Continuous ...

 Iterative methods for solving economic models - DSpace@MIT

 agent-based computational economics: a constructive approach to ...

Kantorovich, Leonid V. - INFORMS.org

Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1975

Koopmans, Tjalling C. - Informs.org

Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1975

A Brief History of Wassily Leontif and Input-Output Analysis

Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1973

 Econometric Software: The first Fifty Years in Perspective*

From Computors to Computers: The Early History of Econometric ...

Computable General Equilibrium - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

Applied General Equilibrium Analysis: Birth, Growth, and Maturity

 The emergence of agent-based modeling in economics: Individuals ...

 Numerical Methods in Economics - Kenneth L. Judd

 Finance and Monte Carlo Simulation | Semantic Scholar

Complexity Economics - W. Brian Arthur - Santa Fe Institute

 Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott's Contribution to Dynamic ...

Artificial Intelligence in Economics Research: What Have We ...

Econometrics Toolbox - MATLAB - MathWorks

The Projected Impact of Generative AI on Future Productivity Growth

 Chapter 9 Discrete Time Continuous State Dynamic Models: Methods

 Discrete State Space Methods for Dynamic Economies - Duke People

 On Deterministic And Stochastic Structures. - Princeton University

Calibration and validation of macroeconomic simulation models by ...

Deep learning for solving dynamic economic models. - ScienceDirect

 Deep learning for solving dynamic economic models.

 PDE Models in Macroeconomics - Benjamin Moll

Bootstrap Methods in Econometrics - Annual Reviews

The Bootstrap in Econometrics - Project Euclid

 GPU Computing in Economics - eScholarship

Solving dynamic equilibrium models with graphics processors

Agent-based computational economics - Scholarpedia

ACE: A Completely Agent-Based Modeling Approach (Tesfatsion)

Agent-Based Modeling in Economics and Finance: Past, Present ...

 Agent-Based Modeling in Economics and Finance: Past, Present ...

Agent-based Computational Economic Models - Turing Finance

A Wealth Distribution Agent Model Based on a Few Universal ...

Calibrating Agent-Based Models of Innovation Diffusion with Gradients

 Validation of agent-based models in economics and finance

What Do Agent-Based and Equation-Based Modelling Tell Us About ...

 Solution and Estimation Methods for DSGE Models

Where modern macroeconomics went wrong - Oxford Academic

 Demand Estimation with Machine Learning and Model Combination

Approximating Auction Equilibria with Reinforcement Learning - arXiv

Policy Analysis Using DSGE Models: An Introduction

Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE ...

DSGE Models for Monetary Policy Analysis - ScienceDirect.com

 Demystifying Modelling Methods for Trade Policy

The Effects of Climate Change on GDP by Country and the Global ...

 Fiscal Multipliers and the State of the Economy

Impulse response matching estimators for DSGE models

WorkSim: An Agent-Based Model of Labor Markets - JASSS

https://www2.econ.iastate.edu/papers/p3833-2004-06-23.pdf

Bounded rationality in agentbased models: experiments with ...

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedc.2008.05.003

https://doi.org/10.1111/ecin.12897

Multiasset financial bubbles in an agent-based model with noise ...

 options: a monte carlo approach - Ressources actuarielles

 A Framework for Assessing the Systemic Risk of Major Financial ...

 Efficient Monte Carlo methods for value-at-risk

 Agent-Based Simulation of Community Currencies with Basic Income

https://oxfordre.com/economics/display/10.1093/acrefore/9780190625979.001.0001/acrefore-9780190625979-e-256

Cryptocurrency Exchange Simulation | Computational Economics

Tackling emissions and inequality: policy insights from an agent ...

Which programming language is best for economic research: Julia ...

 A Comparison of Programming Languages in Economics

13. SciPy - Python Programming for Economics and Finance

11. NumPy - Python Programming for Economics and Finance

The FRBNY DSGE Model Meets Julia - Liberty Street Economics

Introduction to Econometrics with R

25. The Solow-Swan Growth Model

Dynare

Estimation (Dynare Reference Manual)

 Dynare Reference Manual

NetLogo Models Library

scikit-learn: machine learning in Python scikit-learn 1.7.2 ...

Machine Learning in Economics - QuantEcon DataScience

Introduction to Machine Learning and AI Coding for Economists

QuantEcon

Intermediate Quantitative Economics with Python - QuantEcon

Quantitative Economics with Julia - QuantEcon

GAMS - Cutting Edge Modeling

 Economic Equilibrium Modeling with GAMS

Introduction - GAMS

14. Pandas - Python Programming for Economics and Finance

Run QuantEcon Lectures with Google Colab!

Computational economics workshop at the IMF, March 2024 - GitHub

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control - ScienceDirect.com

Computational Economics

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control - SCImago

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control - Impact Factor (IF ...

Computational Economics - SCImago

Computational Economics - Impact Factor (IF), Overall Ranking ...

International Journal of Computational Economics and Econometrics

Bayesian Networks and Machine Learning Approaches Applied to ...

Machine learning for economics research: when, what and how

About Society for Computational Economics

Call for papers - XIII International Workshop of Computational ...

Society for Computational Economics

SCE Conferences - Society for Computational Economics

CEF 2021 - Society for Computational Economics

Sparse High Dimensional Models in Economics - PMC - NIH

 Agent Based Computational Economics: A Review, Challenges And ...

 8 Some scattered thoughts on DSGE models - CREI-UPF

Reproducible research in computational economics: guidelines ...

Modelling dataset bias in machine-learned theories of economic ...

 On DSGE Models - American Economic Association

A survey on agentbased modelling assisted by machine learning

 Combining Machine Learning and Agent-Based Modeling to Study ...

The development of a blockchain-based business model simulator ...

On modeling blockchain-enabled economic networks as stochastic ...

Quantum Economic Advantage | Management Science - PubsOnLine

 Empirical evaluation of a quantum accelerated approach for the ...

Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) in Economic Modeling and ...

Explainable and transparent artificial intelligence for public ...

Computational Aspects of Sustainability | Computational Economics

 GREENER principles for environmentally sustainable computational ...

Federated Learning: A Survey on Privacy-Preserving Collaborative ...

(PDF) Federated Learning for Privacy-Preserving: A Review of PII ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion