Cooperative multitasking Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Cooperative multitasking
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Cooperative multitasking, also known as non-preemptive multitasking, is a style of computer multitasking in which the operating system relies on individual tasks or processes to voluntarily yield control of the processor, allowing other tasks to execute without the OS forcibly intervening. In this model, a running task retains the CPU until it explicitly relinquishes control, typically through a system call like yielding for an event or input, ensuring that all applications share resources cooperatively. This approach contrasts sharply with preemptive multitasking, where the OS uses timers or interrupts to switch tasks automatically, preventing any single process from monopolizing resources.
Historically, cooperative multitasking emerged as a simple mechanism in early personal computing operating systems, prioritizing ease of implementation over robust resource enforcement due to hardware limitations. Prominent examples include Windows 3.x (from 1990 to 1994), where applications yielded control via functions like GetMessage, and classic Mac OS versions up to 9.x (through 2001), which used the Process Manager and calls such as WaitNextEvent to facilitate task switching between applications. These systems, designed for single-user environments, treated the entire OS as a cooperative framework, with no built-in protection against faulty or malicious code hogging the CPU.
While cooperative multitasking offers advantages like lower overheadno need for complex kernel scheduling or context-switching timersit is inherently vulnerable, as a single misbehaving task can halt the entire system by failing to yield. This reliability issue contributed to its decline in favor of preemptive models starting in the mid-1990s, though it persists in niche embedded systems, lightweight threading libraries, and certain actor-based frameworks for its efficiency in resource-constrained settings. Modern implementations often hybridize it within preemptive environments, such as coroutines in languages like C++ or Swift, to enable fine-grained concurrency without full OS involvement.

Fundamentals

Definition

Cooperative multitasking is a scheduling paradigm in operating systems where individual processes or threads voluntarily relinquish control of the CPU to the scheduler after completing a specific operation or task slice, allowing other processes or threads to execute without forced interruption by the operating system. This approach depends entirely on the cooperative behavior of software entities, as the OS does not employ mechanisms like timers or interrupts to preempt running tasks. Unlike preemptive multitasking, where the OS actively enforces context switches to ensure fairness and responsiveness, cooperative multitasking places the responsibility on applications to yield appropriately.
The core principle of cooperative multitasking is the assumption of mutual cooperation at the application level, where each task is designed to periodically or contextually surrender CPU time to prevent monopolization and enable concurrent execution of multiple programs on a single processor. This voluntary handover minimizes overhead from frequent context switches but requires well-behaved software to avoid scenarios where a single task hogs resources, potentially leading to system unresponsiveness. By relying on explicit yields rather than hardware-enforced preemption, it promotes simplicity in implementation, particularly in environments with trusted or controlled applications.
Key terminology in cooperative multitasking includes the "yield" operation, an explicit instruction or system call (such as thread_yield or mythreads_yield) by which a process or thread politely surrenders the CPU to allow others to run. "Round-robin voluntary scheduling" describes a cooperative strategy where tasks cycle through execution in a fixed order, each yielding after a predetermined time slice or operation to mimic equitable sharing. Additionally, "event-driven yielding" refers to the practice where a task yields control upon encountering blocking events, such as input/output requests or synchronization points, facilitating efficient resource utilization without unnecessary polling.

Mechanism

In cooperative multitasking, each task runs continuously on the CPU until it reaches a designated yield point, where it voluntarily relinquishes control to allow other tasks to execute. These yield points are typically triggered by specific events, such as completing an I/O operation or making an explicit call to a yield function provided by the system. Upon encountering a yield point, the task invokes the yield mechanism, which saves its current execution state and signals the scheduler to switch to another task, ensuring orderly progression without involuntary interruptions.
The scheduler serves as a straightforward dispatcher in this model, maintaining a queue or list of ready tasks and activating the next one only when a yield occurs. It selects the subsequent task using a simple policy, such as round-robin or first-in-first-out, without built-in mechanisms to handle complexities like priority inversion, as the system relies on tasks to cooperate by yielding appropriately. This minimalistic approach keeps the scheduler lightweight, focusing solely on resuming the chosen task from its saved state once control returns from the yielding task.
A basic implementation of a task's execution loop can be represented in pseudocode as follows, highlighting the voluntary nature of yielding:
while (task_running) {
 execute_task_logic(); // Perform core operations
 if (yield_condition) { // Check for I/O wait or explicit yield
 yield_to_scheduler(); // Save state and transfer control
 }
}
In this structure, the yield_to_scheduler() call pauses the current task and invokes the dispatcher to select and resume another, forming the core cycle of task alternation.
Context switching occurs efficiently during yields, involving the saving of the current task's CPU stateprimarily registers, stack pointer, and program counterfollowed by loading the state of the next task from its preserved context. This process avoids the overhead of hardware interrupts or timers required for forced switches, resulting in low-latency transitions that are suitable for environments where tasks are designed to cooperate reliably.

History

Origins

The roots of cooperative multitasking trace back to pre-1970s batch processing systems, where programs executed sequentially and were required to relinquish control voluntarily upon completion or during input/output operations to allow the next job to proceed. IBM's OS/360, introduced in 1966, exemplified this approach by managing jobs in a non-preemptive manner, relying on each program to yield the CPU explicitly, which minimized overhead in resource-limited mainframe environments. This manual control mechanism laid the groundwork for later multitasking paradigms by emphasizing voluntary task switching over forced interruptions.
In the 1970s, cooperative multitasking first appeared in minicomputer operating systems designed for simplicity amid hardware constraints, such as limited memory and processing power. Systems like CP/M, released in 1974 by Digital Research, provided a foundational single-tasking framework that influenced early multitasking extensions, prioritizing ease of implementation on microprocessors without advanced hardware support.
The primary motivations for adopting cooperative multitasking during this era stemmed from hardware limitations, particularly the absence of memory management units (MMUs) for process isolation and protection, which made preemptive switching risky and complex to implement. In single-user environments typical of early minicomputers and personal systems, this approach reduced operating system complexity by placing the burden of yielding control on applications, avoiding the need for sophisticated interrupt handling or context-switching hardware. It enabled efficient resource utilization without the overhead of protection mechanisms, suiting the era's emphasis on simplicity and reliability in constrained setups.

Key Developments

In the 1980s, cooperative multitasking expanded significantly with its integration into graphical user interfaces, particularly in Apple's Macintosh System 1 released in 1984, where applications relied on an event-loop mechanism to voluntarily yield control via calls like WaitNextEvent, allowing the operating system to schedule other processes during idle periods. This approach enabled smoother interaction in resource-constrained environments by ensuring applications periodically ceded processor time without preemptive intervention.
During the 1990s, cooperative multitasking remained a core feature in consumer operating systems, as seen in Microsoft's Windows 3.x starting with the 1990 release, where applications ran in a shared environment and were required to yield control voluntarily to enable multitasking among graphical programs. Similarly, Apple's classic Mac OS continued this model through version 9 in 1999, with the Process Manager overseeing cooperative scheduling within a single preemptive task for the entire system. However, this decade marked a transition toward hybrid models in consumer OS, exemplified by Windows 95 in 1995, which combined preemptive multitasking for 32-bit applications with cooperative handling for legacy 16-bit programs to balance stability and compatibility.
The 2000s saw refinements and persistence of cooperative multitasking in specialized legacy systems, such as Novell's NetWare 6.5 released in 2005, which employed it to minimize overhead in network services by running loadable modules in a shared kernel space without preemption. It also influenced the design of scripting languages, notably early JavaScript implementations in browsers like Netscape Navigator from 1995 onward, where the single-threaded event loop enforced cooperative yielding through asynchronous callbacks to handle non-blocking operations.
In recent trends up to 2025, cooperative multitasking has experienced a revival in Internet of Things (IoT) firmware and embedded systems due to its low-overhead scheduling, which avoids the context-switching costs of preemptive models in resource-limited devices, as demonstrated in lightweight schedulers like RIOS for real-time applications. Meanwhile, major consumer operating systems have seen no significant shifts back to pure cooperative models since the 2010s, with preemptive and hybrid approaches dominating for enhanced reliability.

Implementations

In Desktop Operating Systems

Cooperative multitasking was prominently featured in early desktop operating systems, where applications shared CPU time by voluntarily yielding control through message loops or event handlers. In Microsoft Windows 3.0 (released in 1990) and Windows 3.1 (1992), this model relied on applications processing messages via the GetMessage function within their main loops, allowing the system to switch tasks only when an application explicitly relinquished control. This approach enabled multiple 16-bit applications to run concurrently on top of MS-DOS, but it had significant limitations: a poorly written or buggy application that failed to yield could monopolize the CPU, causing system-wide hangs that often required a full reboot, sometimes manifesting as blue screens for general protection faults or kernel errors.
Classic Mac OS, from System 7 (1991) through Mac OS 9 (1999), implemented cooperative multitasking via an event-driven model managed by the Event Manager and Process Manager. Applications handled events through the main event loop, using functions like GetNextEvent to retrieve events from the system queue and process low-level inputs such as mouse clicks or keypresses; this function implicitly yielded control by calling SystemTask, which allocated time to desk accessories and background processes at least every 1/60th of a second. Starting with System 7, the preferred WaitNextEvent function enhanced yielding by incorporating a sleep parameter (in ticks) to specify idle time, allowing the foreground application to pause and grant CPU access to background tasks, provided the application's 'SIZE' resource enabled background processing via flags like canBackground. This voluntary yielding was essential for responsiveness, as failure to do so could freeze the entire system, though MultiFinder (introduced in 1987 with System Software 5) improved context switching between foreground and background applications.
Other desktop environments also adopted cooperative multitasking for their graphical interfaces. RISC OS (initially released as Arthur in 1987) employed cooperative multitasking in its desktop environment, with applications using the Wimp_Poll system call to check for events and voluntarily yield CPU time, enabling seamless window management and integration with the icon bar for tasks like real-time dragging. This model created an illusion of simultaneous execution but risked system stalls if an application neglected to poll.
The use of cooperative multitasking in desktop operating systems declined with the shift to preemptive models for greater stability and reliability. Windows 95 and Windows NT (both 1995) introduced preemptive multitasking for 32-bit applications, allowing the kernel to forcibly switch tasks without relying on application cooperation, while retaining cooperative handling for legacy 16-bit code. Mac OS X (2001), built on a Unix foundation, fully adopted preemptive multitasking, phasing out the cooperative event loop of Classic Mac OS in favor of protected memory and kernel-level scheduling.

In Embedded and Specialized Systems

Cooperative multitasking remains prevalent in embedded systems due to their limited resources, where simplicity and low overhead are prioritized over complex preemption mechanisms. In Arduino platforms, launched in 2005, developers achieve cooperative behavior by designing sketches around the main loop() function, which repeatedly calls user code and yields control through non-blocking delays or explicit yields to simulate concurrency without an RTOS. Specialized libraries like CooperativeMultitasking further enable this by managing multiple functions that voluntarily yield, allowing near-simultaneous execution on single-core microcontrollers such as AVR-based boards.
Real-time operating systems like FreeRTOS, commonly used in embedded applications, include an optional cooperative scheduling mode that reduces kernel overhead by switching tasks only when they explicitly yield or block, rather than through timer interrupts. This mode is activated by configuring configUSE_PREEMPTION to 0 in the FreeRTOSConfig.h file, making it suitable for deterministic, low-power scenarios where tasks are designed to cooperate.
In enterprise environments, IBM's Customer Information Control System (CICS), first released in 1968 and actively maintained as of 2025, relies on pseudo-conversational transaction design for multitasking. In this approach, transactions process user input, update state, and yield control back to CICS by terminating, with subsequent interactions reinitializing a new taskeffectively cooperating to share system resources efficiently across multiple users. Similarly, IBM's Job Entry Subsystem 2 (JES2) coordinates batch processing on z/OS mainframes by managing job queues and spooling in multi-system configurations, where members cooperate to schedule and execute jobs without direct preemption, ensuring orderly resource allocation.
Contemporary applications in specialized domains leverage cooperative models for single-threaded efficiency. Node.js, introduced in 2009, employs a single-threaded event loop to handle asynchronous operations cooperatively: callbacks process events in phases and yield to the loop via non-blocking I/O, supporting thousands of concurrent connections without thread switching overhead. Python's asyncio library implements a variant through coroutines, where async functions use await to suspend execution and yield control to the event loop, enabling structured concurrent I/O-bound code in a cooperative manner.
As of 2025, cooperative multitasking persists in Internet of Things (IoT) devices for its minimal footprint and predictability. For instance, ESP32 firmware, built on FreeRTOS, often utilizes the cooperative mode to manage tasks like sensor polling and wireless communication, yielding explicitly to maintain responsiveness in battery-constrained setups. This approach simplifies development for resource-limited environments while avoiding the complexity of full preemption.

Comparison with Preemptive Multitasking

Key Differences

Cooperative multitasking and preemptive multitasking differ fundamentally in their control mechanisms. In cooperative multitasking, tasks voluntarily yield control to the scheduler, typically through explicit calls or when completing operations, without any external interruption from the operating system. In contrast, preemptive multitasking relies on the operating system to enforce task switching via hardware timer interrupts, allowing the kernel to suspend a running task at any point to allocate CPU time to another, ensuring involuntary context switches. This absence of kernel-level preemption in cooperative systems means that tasks retain uninterrupted execution until they choose to yield, whereas preemptive systems use periodic interruptsoften every few millisecondsto maintain system responsiveness.
Resource allocation also varies significantly between the two models. Cooperative multitasking depends on the design and behavior of individual applications for fairness, as tasks must cooperatively share resources without enforcement, potentially leading to imbalances if one task hogs the CPU. Preemptive multitasking, however, employs hardware-enforced time slices allocated by the kernel, dynamically adjusting priorities and durations to promote equitable distribution among tasks, independent of their internal logic. For instance, in preemptive systems like Linux, processes receive dynamically predetermined timeslices before preemption, ensuring no single task monopolizes resources indefinitely.
The overhead associated with task switching is lower in cooperative multitasking compared to preemptive approaches. Context switches in cooperative systems occur only in user mode when tasks explicitly yield, avoiding the need for kernel intervention and thus incurring minimal costs, as tasks often save their own state without executive involvement. Preemptive multitasking, by contrast, involves higher overhead due to frequent kernel-level operations, including ring 0 transitions for interrupt handling, state saving in process control blocks, and restoration, which can take microseconds and affect cache performance. This ring-level involvement in preemptive switchesshifting from user to kernel modeamplifies the computational expense relative to the user-mode-only yields in cooperative multitasking.
Protection and isolation mechanisms represent another key distinction. Cooperative multitasking provides no inherent isolation from errant tasks, as all processes share the same address space and lack enforced boundaries, allowing a single misbehaving tasksuch as one in an infinite loopto halt the entire system. Preemptive multitasking, however, incorporates memory protection units and separate address spaces managed by the kernel, isolating tasks and preventing one from corrupting others' memory or resources through hardware-enforced privileges and fault handling. This kernel-mediated isolation in preemptive systems enhances robustness, as the operating system can detect and recover from faults without global disruption.

Advantages and Disadvantages

Cooperative multitasking offers several advantages, particularly in terms of simplicity and efficiency. It simplifies programming by eliminating the need for developers to handle unexpected preemptions, thereby reducing the risk of race conditions and synchronization issues that arise from involuntary context switches. This approach frees programmers from constantly considering interference from other processes, allowing for more straightforward code design. Additionally, it incurs lower CPU overhead compared to preemptive methods, as there are no periodic timer interrupts required to force task switches, resulting in cheaper implementation and reduced resource consumption. In trusted environments where applications are developed by a single team or in controlled settings, cooperative multitasking is particularly suitable, as it relies on voluntary yielding without the complexity of enforcing compliance.
Despite these benefits, cooperative multitasking has notable disadvantages that limit its applicability in certain scenarios. A primary drawback is system instability caused by non-cooperative applications; if one task enters an infinite loop or fails to yield control, it can monopolize the CPU and freeze the entire system. This vulnerability stems from the lack of enforced scheduling, making it unreliable in environments with untrusted or buggy software. Furthermore, it provides poor real-time response, as there are no guaranteed time slices, leading to unpredictable latencies that can hinder time-critical operations. Scalability is also limited in multi-user setups, where diverse applications may not cooperate reliably, exacerbating resource contention and fairness issues.
These advantages make cooperative multitasking ideal for use cases such as single-purpose embedded tasks, where resource constraints favor low-overhead designs and performance is enhanced by explicit control points. It is also well-suited for legacy applications in controlled ecosystems, such as older desktop systems or specialized software, where the codebase is known and trusted, avoiding the need for robust preemption mechanisms. However, trade-offs arise when robustness is prioritized; cooperative approaches suffice for efficient, simple systems but necessitate switching to preemptive multitasking for environments requiring stability against faulty or adversarial tasks.

Challenges and Limitations

Common Issues

One of the primary issues in cooperative multitasking arises when an application enters an infinite loop without yielding control back to the scheduler, effectively monopolizing the CPU and rendering the system unresponsive to other tasks. This occurs because tasks are expected to voluntarily relinquish the processor at defined points, such as after completing a logical unit of work, but a programming error like a tight while loop without yield calls prevents this cooperation. For example, in systems relying on explicit yield mechanisms, a faulty process can consume all available processing time, halting progress for all other applications until manual intervention or system reset.
This non-yielding behavior also leads to task starvation, where lower-priority or dependent tasks are indefinitely denied execution opportunities if higher-priority tasks fail to yield promptly or enter prolonged computations. In cooperative environments, the absence of forced context switches means that once a task begins execution, it continues until it decides to cooperate, potentially causing essential system services or user interactions to be starved of CPU cycles. Such starvation exacerbates resource contention in multi-task scenarios, particularly in resource-constrained systems where timely yielding is critical for balanced operation.
Debugging cooperative multitasking systems presents significant challenges due to the difficulty in reproducing and isolating hangs or deadlocks without inherent interruption mechanisms. Unlike preemptive systems, where timers can force task switches for breakpoint insertion, cooperative designs require developers to manually add yield points or cooperative-aware debugging hooks, which can alter program behavior and mask the original issue. This makes it harder to trace execution flows in long-running tasks or identify why a process fails to yield, often necessitating specialized tools like non-intrusive tracers that monitor voluntary switches without disrupting the cooperative flow.
From a security perspective, cooperative multitasking introduces risks of denial-of-service attacks, where malicious or compromised code intentionally avoids yielding to disrupt system availability. An attacker could inject or exploit code that enters a non-terminating loop, consuming CPU resources and preventing legitimate tasks from running, thereby affecting the entire system without needing elevated privileges. This vulnerability stems from the trust placed in all tasks to cooperate fairly, making it easier for poorly isolated or untrusted applications to impact overall stability compared to models with enforced time slicing.

Mitigations

To mitigate the risk of system hangs caused by tasks that fail to yield control in cooperative multitasking environments, watchdog timers are widely employed, particularly in embedded systems. These hardware or software mechanisms monitor task progress by requiring periodic "feeds" or resets; if a task does not yield within a predefined timeouttypically ranging from 5 to 30 secondsthe timer expires and triggers a system reset to restore operation. For instance, in microcontroller-based applications, a task watchdog can use bitmasks to track check-ins from multiple tasks, ensuring the hardware watchdog is only fed if all active tasks have yielded recently, thereby detecting issues like infinite loops or deadlocks. This approach is especially effective in resource-constrained settings where full preemption is impractical, as it enforces timely yielding without altering the cooperative scheduler's core logic.
Yield enforcement techniques further address non-compliance by integrating checks or insertions at the API level to ensure tasks periodically relinquish control. In development frameworks, API hooks or function wrappers can automatically invoke yield operations within potentially long-running sections, such as I/O operations or computations, preventing unintended monopolization of the CPU. Additionally, static analysis tools play a crucial role by verifying the placement of explicit yield statements, using type systems to confirm that all potential interference points are annotated and that context switches occur only at designated yields. For example, projects like Coop employ such analysis to infer and enforce yield annotations in Java-based multithreaded code, reducing concurrency bugs by restricting switches to a minimal set of pointsoften 1 to 10 per thousand lines of codewhile maintaining sequential reasoning properties.
Hybrid approaches combine cooperative multitasking with optional preemptive elements to enhance reliability without fully abandoning voluntary yielding. In real-time operating systems (RTOS), developers can layer preemption on a cooperative base, enabling time-slicing or priority-based interrupts only when configured, as seen in configurable kernels like FreeRTOS where cooperative mode can be extended with preemptive hooks for critical tasks. Recent research proposes more sophisticated hybrids that dynamically switch between modes based on workload, using cooperative yielding for low-contention scenarios to minimize synchronization overhead while invoking preemption for fairness in high-contention cases, thereby mitigating starvation while preserving cooperability's simplicity.
Best practices for developers emphasize proactive design to promote reliable yielding in cooperative systems. Guidelines recommend inserting explicit yield calls periodically within loops or after bounded iterationssuch as every few milliseconds in time-sensitive codeto ensure fair resource sharing, particularly in RTOS environments where tasks must voluntarily invoke functions like taskYIELD() to trigger scheduling. Complementing this, static analysis tools should be integrated into the build process to detect missing or infrequent yields, flagging potential bottlenecks before deployment; for constrained devices, cooperative models are preferred over preemptive ones to avoid interrupt overhead, but only if yields are rigorously enforced through code reviews or automated checks. These practices, when followed, significantly reduce the incidence of hangs while leveraging cooperative multitasking's predictability in embedded and specialized applications.

References

About Multitasking on the Mac OS - Apple Developer

 Real-Time Operating Systems - CS@Columbia

CS360 Lecture notes -- Intro to Process Control - UTK-EECS

 Reducing Processor Power Consumption by Improving ... - Microsoft

Under the Hood: Happy 10th Anniversary, Windows | Microsoft Learn

 Process Manager - Apple Developer

 Cooperative tasking techniques can often meet an embedded ...

 Orleans: Distributed Virtual Actors for Programmability and Scalability

Windows with C++ - Lightweight Cooperative Multitasking with C++

None

2.2. Processes and Multiprogramming - Computer Science - JMU

Multithreading | Foundations of Software Engineering

 Cooperative & Preemptive Context Switching

Big Ideas in the History of Operating Systems - Paul Krzyzanowski

Milestones:The CP/M Microcomputer Operating System, 1974

 HARDWARE DETAILS OS DESIGN PATTERNS - Caltech CMS

The Cooperative Multitasking Environment (IM: Pr) - Inside Macintosh

Windows 3.0 - Operating-system.org

An OS 9 odyssey: Why these Mac users won't abandon 16-year-old ...

If DOS is single-tasking, how was multitasking possible in old ...

Retrotech: The Novell NetWare Experience - SoylentNews

How JavaScript works: Event loop and the rise of Async programming

 RIOS: A Cooperative Multitasking Scheduler in Source Code for ...

Low-cost cooperative multitasking: Part 1 Building a simple FM ...

 Macintosh Toolbox Essentials - Apple Developer

MacTech | The journal of Apple technology.

Unveiling the multitasking magic of the Amiga operating system

How RISC OS happened, as told by original Acorn Arthur lead

Two kinds of multitasking - Applied Mathematics Consulting

Cooperative Multitasking | Arduino Documentation

Introducing multitasking to Arduino - Arduino Blog

CICS at 55: The Evolution of Mainframe Transaction Processing

Pseudoconversational transactions - IBM

Processing work on z/OS: How the system starts and manages batch ...

Node.js The Node.js Event Loop

asyncio Asynchronous I/O

FreeRTOS (IDF) - ESP32 - ESP-IDF Programming Guide v5.5.1 ...

ESP32 FreeRTOS Scheduler Explained | Task Debugging Guide

CS3130: Processes and threads

Processes and Scheduling Algorithms - Brian Heinold

 Shiguang Wang

Concurrency - CS@Columbia - Columbia University

 CS61 Scribe Notes Process isolation; Multiprocessing Michelle Ran ...

6.2. Processes vs. Threads Computer Systems Fundamentals

Embedded multitasking with small MCUs: Part 2 - Cooperative vs ...

 Processes and Multitasking - COE718: Embedded Systems Design

 The Joy of Scheduling | QNX

Lab 4: preemptive multitasking - CSE 451 - Washington

 Non-Intrusive Program Tracing of Non-Preemptive Multitasking ...

 Towards Hybrid Cooperative-Preemptive Scheduling - Nikos Vasilakis

A Guide to Watchdog Timers for Embedded Systems - Interrupt

Watchdog Timer Anti-patterns - Alexandru Lazar

http://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~cormac/coop.html

Towards Hybrid Cooperative-Preemptive Scheduling

 Constrained CIP Security Best Practices | ODVA
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion