CPU time Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
CPU time
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 CPU time is the duration during which a computer's central processing unit (CPU) is actively executing instructions for a specific process or program, excluding periods when the CPU is idle, performing input/output (I/O) operations, accessing storage, or handling other tasks. This metric, also referred to as execution time in performance contexts, measures the actual computational effort expended by the processor on a task and is essential for assessing program efficiency and system performance.
CPU time comprises two main components: user CPU time, the period spent running the program's own instructions, and system CPU time, the period the operating system dedicates to supporting the program, such as processing system calls or managing resources. The total CPU time for a program is calculated as the number of clock cycles it requires multiplied by the length of each clock cycle, or equivalently, divided by the clock frequency:
CPUtime=NumberofclockcyclesClockfrequency \text{CPU time} = \frac{\text{Number of clock cycles}}{\text{Clock frequency}} CPUtime=ClockfrequencyNumberofclockcycles
 In contrast to elapsed time (or wall-clock time), which encompasses all activities from program start to finish including I/O waits and multiprogramming overhead, CPU time focuses solely on processor activity and is typically shorter.
In operating systems, CPU time plays a pivotal role in CPU scheduling, where the CPU burst timethe duration of a process's active computation phase in its alternating cycle of CPU and I/O burstsguides resource allocation to balance efficiency and fairness. Scheduling algorithms, such as shortest job first, prioritize processes with the smallest anticipated burst times to reduce average waiting periods and enhance overall system throughput. Accurate estimation of burst times, often using exponential smoothing techniques like n+1=tn+(1)n\tau_{n+1} = \alpha t_n + (1 - \alpha) \tau_nn+1=tn+(1)n where \alpha is a weighting factor (commonly 0.5), further optimizes these decisions.

Fundamentals

Definition and Importance

CPU time, also known as processing time, is the total amount of time a central processing unit (CPU) dedicates to executing the instructions of a particular process or thread, excluding any idle or waiting periods. It is measured in units such as seconds or clock ticks, where clock ticks represent discrete intervals generated by hardware timers like the processor's cycle counter or system timer interrupts. This metric provides a precise quantification of computational effort, distinct from wall-clock time (also called elapsed real time), which encompasses the full duration from start to finish, including delays due to I/O operations or resource contention.
In multi-core systems, CPU time for a process can accumulate across multiple cores when threads execute in parallel, allowing for higher total utilization than on a single-core setup, though it remains focused on active instruction execution rather than overall system uptime. CPU time is often subdivided into user time, which covers execution of the process's own code, and system time, which accounts for kernel operations performed on the process's behalf.
The importance of CPU time lies in its role as a fundamental measure of program efficiency, offering empirical insight into resource consumption that complements theoretical analyses like Big O notation, which models asymptotic scaling but does not account for hardware-specific factors. In operating systems, it enables accurate performance profiling to identify bottlenecks and optimize code. CPU time measurement developed in early time-sharing systems starting in the late 1950s and early 1960s, such as CTSS (1961) and Multics (1965), and was adopted in Unix (1969). It facilitated fair resource allocation among multiple users and supported usage-based billing to recover computational costs. These systems used CPU time to inform scheduling decisions, ensuring equitable distribution of processor cycles in shared environments. Prior to widespread adoption of more complex metrics, billing in time-sharing setups relied primarily on CPU time or elapsed time to apportion charges. Detailed historical evolution is covered in the Advanced Topics section.

Components of CPU Time

CPU time for a process is typically decomposed into two primary components: user time and system time, which together represent the total processor cycles allocated to the process's execution. User time refers to the duration the CPU spends executing the process's user-level instructions, such as application logic and library calls, while operating in user mode where direct access to hardware is restricted. This component excludes any kernel interventions and is charged solely for the process's own computational work.
System time, in contrast, encompasses the CPU cycles expended by the operating system kernel on behalf of the process, including handling system calls, managing interrupts, and performing I/O operations. Activities like file reads or network communications trigger transitions to kernel mode, where privileged instructions are executed, contributing to this measure. The total CPU time is thus calculated as the sum of user time and system time, providing a complete account of processor utilization attributable to the process without including idle or waiting periods.
Although not part of core CPU time, wait timeoften termed I/O waitrepresents periods when the process is ready to execute but is blocked awaiting completion of input/output operations or other resources, during which the CPU is not actively processing the task. This metric is tracked separately in operating system statistics to highlight bottlenecks beyond direct computation, such as disk or network latency, and is excluded from the user + system summation to focus on actual execution effort.
In practice, the distribution between user and system time varies by workload; a compute-intensive application, like a numerical simulation, may accumulate predominantly user time due to prolonged execution of algorithmic code, whereas an I/O-heavy program, such as one processing large files, incurs higher system time from frequent kernel interactions. Context switches, which occur when the OS preempts one process to run another, further contribute to system time as they involve kernel-mode operations to save and restore process states, potentially increasing overhead in multitasking environments.

Measurement Techniques

Programming Functions and APIs

In POSIX-compliant systems, the clock() function provides an approximation of the processor time consumed by the current process since the start of an implementation-defined era, typically measured in clock ticks where CLOCKS_PER_SEC defines the resolution (often 1,000,000 ticks per second). This function is declared in <time.h> and returns a clock_t value, suitable for basic process-level CPU time tracking but without breakdown into user and system modes.
For more detailed accounting, the times() function retrieves time usage for the calling process and its child processes, populating a struct tms with fields such as tms_utime (user CPU time) and tms_stime (system CPU time), both in clock ticks. Similarly, getrusage() offers comprehensive resource statistics via a struct rusage, including ru_utime and ru_stime for user and system CPU times in microseconds, applicable to the current process (RUSAGE_SELF) or its terminated children (RUSAGE_CHILDREN). These functions, defined in <sys/times.h> and <sys/resource.h>, enable precise decomposition of CPU time into user-mode execution (application code) and system-mode execution (kernel services).
On Windows, the GetProcessTimes() API function retrieves timing details for a specified process handle, including user-mode time and kernel-mode time (equivalent to system time) as FILETIME structures representing 100-nanosecond intervals. This function is part of the Windows API in <processthreadsapi.h> and requires appropriate privileges for other processes. An example in C++ pseudocode to query user and kernel times for the current process is:
#include <windows.h>
#include <processthreadsapi.h>

HANDLE hProcess = GetCurrentProcess();
FILETIME creationTime, exitTime, kernelTime, userTime;
if (GetProcessTimes(hProcess, &creationTime, &exitTime, &kernelTime, &userTime)) {
 // Convert FILETIME to ULARGE_INTEGER for arithmetic if needed
 ULARGE_INTEGER ulKernel, ulUser;
 ulKernel.LowPart = kernelTime.dwLowDateTime;
 ulKernel.HighPart = kernelTime.dwHighDateTime;
 ulUser.LowPart = userTime.dwLowDateTime;
 ulUser.HighPart = userTime.dwHighDateTime;
 // Total CPU time in 100-ns units: ulKernel.QuadPart + ulUser.QuadPart
}

Modern extensions for high-resolution measurement include the x86 RDTSC (Read Time-Stamp Counter) instruction, which loads the 64-bit timestamp countera hardware register incremented every processor clock cycle since resetinto EDX:EAX registers. This enables cycle-accurate profiling via inline assembly or intrinsics like __rdtsc() in GCC or MSVC, but accuracy can vary across multi-core systems due to potential desynchronization of counters between processors or frequency scaling.
Cross-platform libraries abstract these APIs for portability. In C++, std::clock() from <ctime> (part of the chrono facilities) returns approximate processor time for the entire program in clock ticks, offering a standardized interface across compilers. For Java, the ThreadMXBean obtained via ManagementFactory.getThreadMXBean() provides getThreadCpuTime(long id) to retrieve per-thread CPU time in nanoseconds, summing user and system contributions, with support verifiable via isThreadCpuTimeSupported().
To convert raw CPU cycles from counters like RDTSC to elapsed time, divide the cycle count by the processor's clock frequency:
Time(seconds)=CyclesClockfrequency(Hz) \text{Time (seconds)} = \frac{\text{Cycles}}{\text{Clock frequency (Hz)}} Time(seconds)=Clockfrequency(Hz)Cycles
For instance, on a 3.0 GHz CPU (3 10^9 Hz), 3 billion cycles equate to 1 second.
These measurement APIs exhibit inaccuracies in virtualized environments, where hypervisor scheduling and time-sharing introduce overhead, such as "steal time" that underreports effective CPU utilization or desynchronizes timestamp counters across virtual CPUs.

Command-Line Tools and Utilities

In Unix-like operating systems, the time command is a fundamental utility for measuring the CPU time and overall execution duration of a program or script. When invoked as time command, it executes the specified command and reports three key metrics in its default output format: "real" for the elapsed wall-clock time from start to finish, "user" for the cumulative CPU time spent in user mode by the process, and "sys" for the cumulative CPU time spent in kernel mode. For example, the output might appear as real 0m0.080s\nuser 0m0.010s\nsys 0m0.000s, where the values indicate seconds (or minutes:seconds for longer runs) and highlight how much processor time was dedicated to the task versus waiting for I/O or other resources. This tool is particularly useful for benchmarking simple scripts, such as a basic loop that performs arithmetic operations, allowing users to interpret results by comparing user+sys (total CPU time) against real time to assess efficiency.
For real-time monitoring of CPU time across running processes, the top command provides an interactive display of system-wide and per-process metrics, including the %CPU column, which calculates the percentage of CPU capacity used by a process over the last sampling interval (typically 1-3 seconds). In multi-core systems, %CPU can exceed 100% to reflect usage across multiple processors, with the value derived from the kernel's tracking of process scheduling and CPU ticks. An enhanced alternative, htop, offers a more user-friendly interface with color-coded bars for CPU usage, sortable columns for %CPU, and tree views of process hierarchies, making it easier to spot high-CPU consumers in real time without needing to toggle modes manually.
On Linux systems, the ps command can report cumulative CPU time for processes using the -o times flag, which outputs the total user and system CPU time consumed by each process in a formatted column labeled "TIME" (e.g., ps -eo pid,comm,times displays process ID, command name, and accumulated time in HH:MM:SS format). This provides a snapshot of historical CPU usage since process inception, summing user-mode and kernel-mode contributions for analysis of long-running tasks.
For non-Unix environments, the Windows Task Manager offers per-process CPU time tracking in its Details tab, where the "CPU Time" column shows the total processor cycles (in HH:MM:SS format) a process has utilized since launch, distinguishing it from instantaneous %CPU percentages. This metric, based on kernel-reported process execution times, helps identify resource-intensive applications without requiring command-line access.
Modern Linux tools extend these capabilities for deeper analysis; for instance, perf enables detailed CPU event tracing by recording hardware performance counters, such as cycles and instructions retired, to profile user and system CPU time with commands like perf record -e cycles ./program followed by perf report for breakdowns. In containerized setups, docker stats provides ongoing CPU usage metrics for running containers, displaying percentages relative to the host's total CPU capacity (e.g., up to 100% per core) alongside memory and I/O, derived from cgroup statistics for isolated process monitoring.

CPU Time in Multi-Processing Environments

Total CPU Time Across Cores

In multi-core or multi-processor systems, total CPU time for a parallel workload is the aggregate measure of processor resource consumption, calculated as the sum of individual CPU times across all threads or processes executing on the available cores. This summation reflects the total computational effort expended by the hardware, independent of scheduling or concurrency overheads.
For fully parallel tasks on N cores, the total CPU time ideally approximates N times the CPU time required on a single core, assuming perfect load distribution and no synchronization costs. This scaling arises because each core contributes independently to the workload, multiplying the effective processing capacity. For example, a task parallelized across 4 cores might yield a total CPU time of 40 seconds, with each core accounting for 10 seconds of execution.
In practice, APIs like getrusage() enable measurement of this total by summing user and system CPU times for all threads in a multi-threaded application, providing thread-level granularity for resource tracking. However, non-ideal scaling often occurs due to sequential code segments and overheads, as highlighted by Amdahl's law, which limits the benefits of additional cores when parallelism is incomplete.

CPU Time Versus Elapsed Real Time

Elapsed real time, often referred to as wall-clock time, represents the total duration from the initiation to the termination of a process or program, as measured by an external clock; this includes all intervals during which the process is active, idle, waiting for input/output operations, or suspended due to system scheduling. In essence, it captures the full chronological span encompassing not only computational activity but also any non-computing delays.
CPU time, by contrast, quantifies solely the aggregate duration the central processing unit (CPU) is dedicated to executing the process's instructions, typically partitioned into user time (for application code) and system time (for kernel operations on behalf of the process). This metric excludes periods of inactivity or external waits, focusing exclusively on processor utilization.
The fundamental relationship between elapsed real time and CPU time is that the former is always greater than or equal to the latter, with equality achievable only under ideal conditions of continuous, uninterrupted execution on a single core without input/output dependencies or multitasking interferencesuch as a purely compute-bound, single-threaded workload on an otherwise idle system. In practice, discrepancies arise from factors like resource contention or blocking operations, where elapsed real time accumulates overhead not attributable to direct CPU usage.
A classic illustration of this disparity occurs in I/O-bound processes, where tasks like file reading or network communication dominate; here, CPU time remains minimal as the processor idles during data transfers, yet elapsed real time extends substantially due to prolonged waits for peripheral devices. Similarly, in multitasking environments, scheduler preemptionwhere a process is involuntarily paused to allocate CPU cycles to higher-priority taskselevates elapsed real time through enforced idle periods without incrementing the process's CPU time.
In lightly parallel execution, the CPU time contribution underscores efficiency gains, as the speedupcalculated as the ratio of single-processor elapsed time to parallel elapsed timereflects how distributed computation across cores reduces wall-clock duration while total CPU time may aggregate beyond it.
In contemporary virtualization setups, guest virtual machine CPU time often diverges from host elapsed real time owing to hypervisor-mediated scheduling, which time-slices physical CPU resources among multiple virtual CPUs, introducing additional latency and desynchronization in the guest's perceived execution timeline. This effect is particularly pronounced when virtual CPUs contend for host hardware, causing guest processes to experience extended waits not reflected in their internal CPU time measurements.

Advanced Topics and Variations

Historical Evolution

The concept of CPU time emerged in the early 1960s with the development of time-sharing systems, which aimed to allocate processor resources efficiently among multiple users. The Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS), implemented at MIT between 1961 and 1963, was among the first to enable interactive computing by slicing CPU execution time for concurrent sessions, with mechanisms to track and report CPU usage per command for billing and resource management. This approach influenced Multics, a collaborative project starting in 1965 between MIT, Bell Labs, and General Electric, which further refined CPU time measurement by monitoring processor allocation alongside paging loads to support multi-user environments.
By the mid-1970s, these ideas carried over into Unix, where Version 6 Unix, released in May 1975, formalized user and system CPU time accounting through the acct(2) system call. This feature recorded the accumulated user-mode and kernel-mode execution times for terminated processes in accounting files, enabling administrators to track resource consumption for auditing and optimization. In the 1980s, Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) variants of Unix extended this accounting to include wait times, deriving them from the difference between elapsed real time and active CPU usage (user plus system), which provided a more complete view of process delays due to I/O or scheduling in multi-user systems.
A key milestone came in 1988 with the POSIX.1 standard (IEEE Std 1003.1-1988), which standardized CPU time measurement across Unix-like systems via functions like times(), requiring implementations to report user CPU time, system CPU time, and equivalent times for child processes in clock ticks. During the 1990s, the rise of Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) architectures, such as those from MIPS and SPARC, influenced cycle-accurate timing by emphasizing fixed instruction execution cycles and predictable latencies, facilitating precise performance analysis and worst-case execution time estimation for real-time applications.
The advent of multi-core processors prompted further evolution, with Linux kernel 2.6, released in December 2003, enhancing CPU time integration for symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) through an improved O(1) scheduler that aggregated times across cores for threaded processes, ensuring accurate accounting in parallel environments. By the late 2000s, the shift from tick-based timers to high-resolution mechanisms addressed limitations in precision; Linux introduced hrtimers in kernel version 2.6.21 (2007), enabling sub-millisecond accuracy for CPU time measurements by using nanosecond-resolution clocks independent of jiffy granularity.

Operating System Differences

In Unix-like systems such as Linux, CPU time is accounted for in detail through the /proc filesystem, where /proc/stat provides cumulative jiffies of CPU usage broken down into categories including user time (normal processes in user mode), nice time (low-priority user processes), system time (kernel mode execution), idle time, and iowait time (CPU idle while awaiting I/O). This accounting supports the Completely Fair Scheduler (CFS), introduced in Linux kernel 2.6.23 in 2007, which allocates CPU time proportionally based on process virtual runtime to ensure fairness among tasks.
Windows operating systems distinguish CPU time between kernel (privileged) mode and user mode via Performance Monitor counters, such as Processor:% Privileged Time for kernel execution and Processor:% User Time for application-level processing. The NT kernel employs a priority-based preemptive scheduler that assigns dynamic time slices to threads, with higher-priority threads receiving longer quanta to minimize latency for interactive tasks.
macOS and iOS, built on the XNU kernel (a hybrid of Mach microkernel and BSD), handle CPU time measurement through the Instruments framework, where the Time Profiler instrument samples CPU usage at millisecond intervals to capture user and system time across threads. These systems incorporate power-aware adjustments; for Intel-based systems, via the XNU CPU Power Management (XCPM) subsystem, which dynamically scales frequency and voltage. For Apple Silicon devices like iPhones and modern Macs, power management is handled by hardware-integrated mechanisms in the system-on-chip, optimizing performance and efficiency cores.
Real-time operating systems like VxWorks emphasize deterministic CPU allocation through preemptive priority-based scheduling, with tasks prioritized from 0 (highest) to 255 (lowest), and provide APIs such as spyUtilShow() from the spy library for per-task CPU time statistics to ensure predictable execution without excessive wait times. Android, integrating the Linux kernel, inherits similar /proc-based CPU time tracking but isolates apps in sandboxed processes via Linux namespaces and SELinux, limiting each app's view to its own CPU usage and preventing cross-app interference in time accounting.
In virtualized environments like VMware, guest OS CPU time measurements can appear inflated compared to host utilization because the guest reports time spent waiting for hypervisor scheduling (CPU ready time) as idle, while overcommitment causes the guest to perceive higher demand on its virtual CPUs than the host's physical resources actually experience. For containerization in systems like Docker, CPU shares are enforced through Linux control groups (cgroups), where the --cpu-shares flag assigns relative weights (default 1024) to allocate proportional CPU time among containers during contention, ensuring fair distribution without hard limits unless quotas are set.

References

 Chapter 1 Performance Measures - UCSD ECE

None

Operating Systems: CPU Scheduling

CPU time - SciNet Users Documentation

CPU Time: What Is It & How To Calculate - PFLB

time(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Big O Notation and Time Complexity Guide: Intuition and Math

CPU time - Chapter 2: The Role of Performance

History - Multics

 Chapter 5: CPU Scheduling - FSU Computer Science

 NASA TECHNICAL NOTE

times

The /proc Filesystem - The Linux Kernel documentation

clock

times

getrusage

GetProcessTimes function (processthreadsapi.h) - Win32 apps

RDTSC Read Time-Stamp Counter

__rdtsc | Microsoft Learn

ThreadMXBean (Java Platform SE 8 ) - Oracle Help Center

Why VM Resource Utilization Metrics Don't Match: Windows vs ...

Virtualization's Impact on Performance Management - Dynatrace

Linux / Unix: time Command Examples - nixCraft

time command in Linux with examples - GeeksforGeeks

What the first five lines of Linux's top command tell you - Red Hat

Guidance for troubleshooting high CPU usage - Windows Server

Linux perf Examples - Brendan Gregg

docker container stats - Docker Docs

getrusage(2) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Does multithreading increase CPU time? - Stack Overflow

CPU Time vs. Elapsed Time in AMPL - Google Groups

 Amdahl's Law in the Multicore Era - Computer Sciences Dept.

time(1) - Linux manual page

 CPU scheduling - Stanford Secure Computer Systems Group

 Timekeeping in VMware Virtual Machines

Timekeeping Virtualization for X86-Based Architectures

 Compatible Time-Sharing System (1961-1973) Fiftieth Anniversary ...

Multics--The first seven years

 A COMMENTARY ON THE SIXTH EDITION UNIX OPERATING ...

17.2. BSD-Style Accounting: FreeBSD, Linux, and AIX - O'Reilly

An accurate worst case timing analysis for RISC processors - ADS

Introducing the 2.6 Kernel - Linux Journal

High Resolution Timer In Linux Linux Device Driver Tutorial Part 27

proc_stat(5) - Linux manual page - man7.org

CFS scheduler merged - LWN.net

Troubleshoot issues using Performance Monitor - Windows Server

Inside the Windows NT Scheduler, Part 1 - ITPro Today

Determining execution frequency Instruments Tutorials

Overview of system tracing | App quality - Android Developers

Key metrics for monitoring VMware vSphere - Datadog

Resource constraints - Docker Docs
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion