CSS Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
CSS
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a stylesheet language used to describe the presentation of a document written in a markup language such as HTML or XML, including dialects like SVG, MathML, and XHTML. It defines how elements are rendered on screen, paper, speech, or other media, enabling the separation of content from styling to improve maintainability and consistency. Developed as a core technology of the open web, CSS allows authors and users to attach stylesuch as fonts, colors, spacing, and layoutsto structured documents without altering their semantics.
The origins of CSS trace back to 1994, when Hkon Wium Lie proposed "Cascading HTML Style Sheets" while working at CERN, aiming to address the limitations of styling in early web documents. Bert Bos contributed through his Argo browser project, and together they collaborated on the initial drafts, with the concept presented at the WWW conference in Chicago that year. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) formalized CSS with the publication of CSS Level 1 as a Recommendation in December 1996, introducing basic features for text styling, fonts, colors, and margins. This was followed by CSS Level 2 in May 1998, which expanded support for media types, positioning, and tables, and later refined in CSS 2.1 to resolve implementation issues.
Beyond early versions, CSS evolved into a modular system, with specifications split into independent modules (e.g., CSS Color Module Level 5, CSS Flexbox) that advance separately for faster development and broader functionality. The "cascading" aspect refers to the mechanism by which styles are applied based on specificity, inheritance, and source order, ensuring user agents like web browsers resolve conflicts when multiple rules apply to the same element. Key features include selectors for targeting elements, properties for defining styles (e.g., color, display), and support for advanced layouts like Flexbox and Grid, animations, and responsive design via media queries.
As of 2025, CSS remains actively maintained by the W3C's CSS Working Group, with over 60 modules in various stages, from stable recommendations to drafts, powering the visual design of modern web applications across billions of devices. Its standardization ensures cross-browser compatibility, while ongoing innovations address needs like accessibility, performance, and integration with emerging web technologies.

Overview

Purpose and Role in Web Development

Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a stylesheet language used to describe the presentation of a document written in a markup language such as HTML or XML, enabling the separation of content structure from visual styling. As a declarative language, CSS allows developers to specify styles for elements without embedding them directly in the markup, promoting maintainable and reusable code. This approach was developed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) starting in 1994, with the first specification, CSS Level 1, published in 1996.
Prior to CSS, HTML's limitations for presentation forced designers to rely on inline presentational attributes or deprecated elements like <font> and <center> for basic formatting, which mixed structure with style and hindered accessibility and scalability. Layouts often used HTML tables, originally intended for tabular data, to achieve column-based designs, leading to inflexible, maintenance-heavy code that was difficult to adapt across devices. CSS addressed these issues by providing a dedicated mechanism for styling, allowing HTML to focus on semantic content while enabling precise control over appearance.
In web development, CSS plays a central role in controlling layout through mechanisms like Flexbox and Grid, as well as defining colors, fonts, spacing, and other visual properties to create cohesive user interfaces. It supports responsiveness via media queries, ensuring styles adapt to varying screen sizes and devices for optimal viewing experiences. Over time, CSS has evolved to incorporate interactive and animated elements through features like transitions and keyframes, enhancing user engagement in modern web standards without requiring scripting for basic effects. CSS integrates with HTML by linking external stylesheets or embedding rules, applying declarations to selected elements for consistent rendering across browsers.

Relationship with HTML and JavaScript

CSS interacts closely with HTML to apply styles to web page elements. CSS selectors are patterns that target specific HTML elements based on their type, class, attributes, or position in the document structure, enabling precise styling applications. For instance, a type selector like p targets all paragraph elements, while a class selector like .highlight applies styles only to elements with that class attribute. This targeting mechanism allows CSS rules to define the visual presentation of HTML content without altering its semantic structure.
There are three primary methods to link CSS to HTML: inline, internal, and external. Inline styles are applied directly to individual elements using the style attribute, such as <p style="color: blue;">Text</p>, which overrides other styles but is generally discouraged for maintainability. Internal styles are embedded within a <style> element in the HTML document's <head>, applying to the entire page, like <style> p { color: blue; } </style>. External styles, the recommended approach for larger projects, are defined in a separate .css file and linked via a <link> element in the <head>, for example, <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css">, promoting reusability across multiple pages.
In web development, CSS, HTML, and JavaScript adhere to the principle of separation of concerns, where HTML handles content and structure, CSS manages presentation and layout, and JavaScript controls behavior and interactivity. This division enhances maintainability, accessibility, and scalability by keeping code modular; for example, changes to styling do not affect the underlying document semantics.
JavaScript integrates with CSS through the CSS Object Model (CSSOM) API, which provides programmatic access to styles. Developers can read computed styles using window.getComputedStyle(element), which returns a live CSSStyleDeclaration object with final, resolved property values after applying the cascade. To modify styles at runtime, JavaScript can alter the element.style property for inline changes or insert new rules dynamically, enabling effects like theme switching by updating properties such as background-color based on user preferences. The CSSOM extends core DOM interfaces like Element and Window, allowing seamless manipulation of CSS alongside HTML.
A common integration involves JavaScript toggling CSS classes in response to events, such as clicks or form submissions, to trigger visual changes without inline styles. For example, adding or removing a class like .active via element.classList.toggle('active') can apply predefined CSS rules, such as highlighting a menu item on hover or showing/hiding elements for dynamic interfaces. This approach leverages event listeners like addEventListener('click', ...) to update the DOM's class attributes, which CSS then interprets for styling.

Syntax and Basics

Structure of a Style Sheet

A CSS style sheet consists of a sequence of statements, which are either rulesets or at-rules, forming the basic organizational units of the document. This structure allows for the definition of styles that can be applied to elements in a markup document, with the entire style sheet parsed as a flat list of these statements.
The core component of a style sheet is the ruleset, which pairs one or more selectors with a declaration block enclosed in curly braces. A declaration block begins with an opening brace {, followed by zero or more semicolon-separated declarations, and ends with a closing brace }. Whitespace, including spaces, tabs, line breaks, and form feeds, is permitted around selectors, braces, and declarations to enhance readability without affecting the semantic meaning, as it is ignored during parsing except within string literals or comments. Indentation and line breaks are commonly used by authors to organize rulesets visually, though they have no impact on rendering.
Modern CSS also supports nesting of style rules within other rules for improved readability and modularity, as defined in the CSS Nesting Module. For example:
.parent {
 color: blue;
 & .child {
 color: red;
 }
}
This nests the .child rule relative to .parent, equivalent to .parent .child. The & nesting selector explicitly references the parent rule. Nesting is fully supported in major browsers as of 2023.
Comments in CSS are enclosed between /* and */, allowing authors to add explanatory notes or temporarily disable sections of code; these can appear anywhere outside of other tokens and are non-nestable. For example:
/* This comment spans multiple lines */
h1 { color: blue; } /* Inline comment after declaration */
At-rules provide special instructions outside the standard ruleset format, starting with an at-keyword (e.g., @import) followed by optional parameters and either a semicolon or a block. They enable functionalities like importing other style sheets, as in @import url("styles.css");, which loads an external resource at parse time.
Style sheets can be incorporated into web documents in three primary ways: external, internal (embedded), or inline, each with distinct advantages and trade-offs for maintainability and performance. External style sheets are linked via the <link> element in the HTML head, such as <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css" type="text/css">, promoting reusability across multiple pages and enabling browser caching for faster loading on subsequent visits, though they require separate file management and an additional HTTP request. Internal style sheets are placed within a <style> element in the document head, applying styles solely to that page for targeted customization without external dependencies, but they increase file size and cannot be shared. Inline styles are applied directly to elements via the style attribute, like <p style="color: red;">, offering precise control for unique cases but hindering maintainability due to lack of reusability and overriding higher-level styles.
CSS keywords, property names, at-keyword names, and function names are case-insensitive, meaning Color: red; is equivalent to color: RED;. However, identifiers such as custom class or ID names in selectors are case-sensitive in contexts like HTML documents, where MyClass differs from myclass. Multiple style sheets from different sources can influence a document's rendering, with their rules combined through a defined resolution process.

Selectors and Combinators

Selectors in CSS are patterns used to target specific elements in an HTML document for styling, enabling precise control over which parts of a webpage receive particular rules. They form the foundation of CSS rule application by matching against the document's structure, attributes, and relationships between elements. Basic selectors identify individual elements or groups, while combinators connect multiple selectors to describe more complex hierarchical or sibling relationships within the document tree.
The primary types of selectors include type selectors, which target elements by their tag name, such as p for all paragraph elements. Class selectors, denoted by a period (e.g., .highlight), match elements bearing a specific class attribute value, allowing reusable styling across multiple elements. ID selectors, prefixed with a hash (e.g., #header), uniquely identify a single element via its ID attribute, providing targeted application for distinct components. The universal selector * matches any element in the document, serving as a broad catch-all when combined with other patterns. Attribute selectors, enclosed in square brackets (e.g., ), target elements based on the presence, value, or pattern matching of any attribute, offering flexibility beyond standard HTML semantics.
Combinators link compound selectors to specify relational targeting. The descendant combinator, represented by a space (e.g., div p), selects all elements that are descendants of a specified ancestor at any nesting level. The child combinator > (e.g., ul > li) restricts matching to direct child elements only, ignoring deeper nesting. The adjacent sibling combinator + (e.g., h2 + p) targets an element that immediately follows another in the document tree as siblings. The general sibling combinator ~ (e.g., h2 ~ p) matches any sibling elements that follow the specified element, regardless of intervening content. These combinators enable CSS authors to navigate the document's structure efficiently without altering the HTML.
Selectors can be chained into compound or complex patterns for refined targeting. A compound selector combines multiple simple selectors without spaces, such as div.warning#intro, which matches a div element with both the warning class and intro ID. Complex selectors use combinators to chain compounds, like article > h1.title + p, selecting a paragraph that immediately follows a titled heading within an article. This syntax allows for concise expressions of intricate selection logic.
Modern developments include the :has() relational pseudo-class, introduced in Selectors Level 4, which matches an element if it contains at least one descendant or child matching the specified selector (e.g., section:has(img) styles sections containing images). This feature, part of the specification published as a Working Draft on 11 November 2022, enhances parent-relative targeting previously limited in CSS. By November 2025, :has() achieves widespread browser support across Chrome (version 105+), Safari (15.4+), Firefox (121+), and Edge (105+), enabling its practical use in production stylesheets.
Selectors Level 4 builds on prior levels by refining pattern matching mechanisms, such as allowing :has() for forward-looking selections and optimizing combinator parsing for better performance in large documents. These enhancements support more efficient querying of HTML and XML trees, reducing computational overhead in rendering engines while expanding expressive power for web authors.

Properties, Values, and Declarations

In CSS, a declaration defines a single style instruction by pairing a property name with a value, formatted as property: value; and placed within curly brace blocks of style rules. These declarations are separated by semicolons within the block, allowing multiple styles to apply to selected elements. To override the normal cascade priority, a declaration may include the !important annotation after the value, such as property: value !important;, which elevates its importance unless another !important declaration with higher specificity prevails. This syntax ensures precise control over styling while maintaining stylesheet readability.
CSS properties are predefined identifiers that dictate aspects of element presentation, grouped into categories such as typography (e.g., font-size, font-weight), color (e.g., color, background-color), and layout (e.g., width, margin). Each property accepts specific value types outlined in the CSS specifications, ensuring compatibility across user agents. For instance, font properties primarily use lengths or keywords to adjust text appearance, while color properties specify hues via dedicated formats. Layout properties like margin often combine lengths and percentages to control spacing.
Values assigned to properties fall into distinct types, including keywords like bold for qualitative settings (e.g., font-weight: bold;), lengths such as px or em (e.g., font-size: 16px;), percentages for proportional scaling (e.g., width: 50%;), and colors represented in hexadecimal (e.g., #ff0000), RGB (e.g., rgb(255, 0, 0)), or HSL (e.g., hsl(0, 100%, 50%)) notations. Lengths and percentages enable flexible sizing, with zero values optionally omitting units (e.g., margin: 0;). Colors extend to functional notations for transparency and gamut mapping, supporting modern display capabilities.
Units for values divide into absolute types, which remain fixed regardless of context (e.g., px for pixels, where 1px equals 1/96 inch; pt for points, where 1pt equals 1/72 inch), and relative types, which adapt to surrounding elements or viewports (e.g., em relative to parent font size, (/page/R.E.M.) to root font size, % to a reference length, vh as 1% of viewport height). This distinction allows responsive designs, as relative units scale with content changes. The calc() function further enhances flexibility by permitting arithmetic expressions mixing compatible types, such as width: calc(100% - 2em);, evaluated at computed value time.
Shorthand properties streamline authoring by condensing multiple related declarations into one, setting unset sub-properties to their initial values; for example, margin: 1em; equivalently applies 1em to top, right, bottom, and left margins. Common shorthands include font for typography (e.g., font: bold 16px (/page/Serif);) and background for visual layers, reducing stylesheet length while preserving full control. Authors must consult property definitions to understand shorthand expansions and omissions.

At-rules and Comments

At-rules in CSS are directives that begin with the "@" symbol and provide instructions for processing the stylesheet, such as importing external resources, applying conditional logic, or defining animations, distinct from standard rule sets that style elements directly. These rules allow authors to structure and modularize stylesheets while influencing how styles are applied based on environmental or capability conditions.
The @import at-rule enables the inclusion of style rules from another stylesheet, typically placed at the beginning of a CSS file to load external styles before local ones. For example, @import url("external.css"); fetches and integrates the specified file, supporting media queries for conditional loading. However, @import can lead to performance issues, as it blocks parallel downloading of resources, potentially delaying page rendering compared to using HTML link elements.
The @media at-rule groups style rules that apply only under specific media conditions, such as screen size or device type, facilitating responsive design by integrating with media queries. Similarly, the @supports at-rule tests for browser support of CSS features before applying styles; the CSS Conditional Rules Module Level 5 extends advanced @supports capabilities, including chained conditionals with @else and enhanced feature detection using functions like font-tech() and at-rule(), in its Working Draft as of October 2025.
For animations, the @keyframes at-rule defines intermediate states in a sequence of property values, allowing smooth transitions over time; for instance, @keyframes fadeIn { from { opacity: 0; } to { opacity: 1; } } specifies key points that the browser interpolates. The @layer at-rule, introduced in the CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 5 specification, organizes styles into named layers to control cascade order explicitly, helping manage specificity conflicts in complex stylesheets.
CSS comments use the syntax /* comment text */ to embed non-executing notes within stylesheets, spanning multiple lines and ignored during parsing, which aids in code documentation, debugging, and collaboration among developers. Unlike HTML comments, CSS comments cannot nest and must be properly closed to avoid syntax errors.

Core Principles

The Cascade

The cascade is the core algorithm in CSS that resolves conflicts among multiple declarations for the same property on an element, determining the final value by prioritizing sources based on origin, importance, and other criteria. This process ensures that styles from various originssuch as default browser styles, user preferences, and author-defined rulesare combined coherently, with later or higher-priority rules overriding earlier ones where applicable.
CSS recognizes three primary origins for style sheets: user agent (UA), user, and author. The UA origin includes the default styles provided by the browser to render documents consistently, such as basic typography and spacing rules. The user origin encompasses custom styles specified by the end-user, often through browser settings or user style sheets to accommodate accessibility needs or preferences. The author origin covers styles defined by the document's creator, typically via external, internal, or inline style sheets in the HTML. By default, author styles override user styles, which in turn override UA styles, allowing creators to control presentation while respecting user customizations where no author rule applies.
Declarations can be marked as important using the !important keyword, which alters the priority hierarchy. The full order of precedence, from lowest to highest, is: normal UA declarations, important UA declarations, normal user declarations, important user declarations, normal author declarations, and important author declarations (with animations and transitions handled separately but following similar inversion for importance). In this scheme, important declarations override normal ones within the same origin, and user-important rules take precedence over author-important rules to empower user control. For instance, a user-important declaration for font-size would override an author-important one, ensuring accessibility overrides like larger text are enforced.
To provide finer control within the author origin, CSS introduces cascade layers via the @layer at-rule, allowing developers to organize styles into explicit priority groups that precede specificity and order in resolution. Layers can be declared using @layer statements (e.g., @layer framework { ... }), blocks, or @import with the layer() function, establishing a forward-ordered hierarchy where later-declared layers have higher priority for normal rules, while earlier ones prevail for important rules. This feature, specified in CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 5 (Candidate Recommendation, January 2022), enables modular stylingsuch as separating base, component, and utility layerswithout relying on hacks like high-specificity selectors.
The cascade resolution proceeds in forward and backward phases. In the forward phase, all relevant declarations are collected and sorted by descending priority: first by origin and importance, then by cascade layer (if applicable), specificity (used as a tie-breaker for equal origins and layers), and finally order of appearance within the stylesheet. The highest-priority declaration yields the cascaded value. The backward phase applies defaulting: if no cascaded value exists, the property inherits from the parent element (for inheritable properties) or reverts to its initial value. Specificity serves only to resolve ties in this process, without altering the primary origin-based ordering.
CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 6 (Working Draft, September 2024) extends cascade support to include the :scope pseudo-class in shadow DOM contexts, enabling scoped selectors to target shadow roots directly within encapsulation boundaries like @scope rules.

Specificity Calculation

Specificity serves as the tie-breaker in the CSS cascade when multiple declarations from the same origin apply to a property, ensuring that the most relevant selector determines the winning value. This numeric system assigns weights to selector components, allowing developers to predict and control style precedence without relying solely on source order. By quantifying selector complexity, specificity promotes maintainable stylesheets where more targeted rules override broader ones systematically.
The specificity of a selector is computed as a three-part tuple (a, b, c), where a represents the number of ID selectors (#id), b the number of class selectors (.class), attribute selectors (), and pseudo-classes (:hover), and c the number of type selectors (div) and pseudo-elements (::before). Inline styles, applied via the style attribute, are part of the author origin and take precedence over declarations from style rules within the same importance level, as they are sorted in the cascade before layers, specificity, and order of appearance. The tuple is compared from left to right: higher values in a precede those in b, and so on, with the universal selector (*) contributing (0, 0, 0). Combinators (such as > or +) and the negation pseudo-class :not() do not add to specificity, though selectors within :not() are counted normally.
To illustrate, consider these examples:
SelectorSpecificity Tuple
*(0, 0, 0)
div(0, 0, 1)
ul li(0, 0, 2)
.class(0, 1, 0)
#id(1, 0, 0)
#id .class(1, 1, 0)
div p.class(0, 1, 2)
In this system, #id with (1, 0, 0) overrides .class with (0, 1, 0), regardless of declaration order, because the ID component takes precedence.
The !important keyword does not alter specificity calculation directly; instead, it elevates the declaration's importance within its origin (user agent, user, or author), after which specificity resolves ties among !important rules of the same origin. This maintains the hierarchy where, for instance, an author !important rule overrides a user one, but within author rules, specificity applies as usual.
In the Selectors Level 4 specification, the :has() pseudo-class introduces a change by contributing specificity equivalent to a single pseudo-class (one unit to the b component), derived from the most specific complex selector in its argument. For example, section:has(.highlight) matches with (0, 1, 1) specificity if .highlight is a class selector. This design ensures :has() behaves predictably without inflating specificity unduly.
Overall, specificity fosters predictable styling by establishing a mathematical ordering that mitigates arbitrary overrides, enabling robust and scalable CSS architectures.

Inheritance and the Initial Value

In CSS, inheritance is a mechanism that allows certain property values to propagate from parent elements to their descendant elements in the document tree when no explicit value is specified for those descendants. This process uses the computed value from the parent, ensuring stylistic consistency across nested elements without requiring redundant declarations. Unlike the cascade, which resolves conflicts among multiple declarations to produce a single cascaded value for a property, inheritance serves as a defaulting step that applies values from ancestors only after the cascade has been resolved, filling in any gaps for unspecified properties.
CSS properties are categorized as either inherited or non-inherited. Inherited properties, such as color and font-size, automatically adopt the parent's computed value if no other declaration applies, which is particularly useful for maintaining uniform text styling across a document. For example, if a parent element has color: green;, its child elements will inherit that green text color unless overridden. In contrast, non-inherited properties, like width or border, do not propagate from parents and instead default to the property's initial value on each element. For instance, a child element will not inherit its parent's width: 50%; but will use the initial value of auto for width unless specified otherwise. This distinction ensures that layout-related properties remain independent, preventing unintended scaling or positioning issues in child elements.
The initial value represents the baseline default for every CSS property, as defined in each property's specification, and is applied when a property is neither inherited nor explicitly declared. For inherited properties, the initial value is used only at the document's root element (e.g., html), from which inheritance can then propagate downward. For non-inherited properties, the initial value applies directly to every element. Examples include normal for font-style and none for border. This mechanism guarantees that all elements have a valid, predictable value for every property, even in the absence of stylesheets.
To give authors fine-grained control, CSS provides three special keywords for overriding defaulting behavior: inherit, initial, and unset. The inherit keyword forces a property to take the parent's computed value, regardless of whether the property is normally inherited (e.g., div { border: inherit; } would pass a parent's border to the div). The initial keyword explicitly sets the property to its initial value, bypassing both inheritance and any cascaded declarations (e.g., p { font-style: initial; } resets to normal). The unset keyword acts contextually: it resolves to inherit for inherited properties and to initial for non-inherited ones, offering a convenient way to "reset" without knowing the property's inheritance status (e.g., element { all: unset; } restores defaults while respecting inheritance for text properties). These keywords are specified values that participate in the cascade like any other declaration.
Inheritance primarily applies to properties related to text and typography, promoting consistency in rendering nested content such as paragraphs within articles, without affecting independent layout dimensions that could disrupt the visual formatting model.

Rendering Model

The Box Model

In the CSS rendering model, every element in a document is represented as a rectangular box consisting of four distinct areas: the content area, padding, border, and margin. The content area defines the space occupied by the element's actual content, such as text or images, with its dimensions set by the width and height properties (or intrinsic sizes if unspecified). Surrounding the content is the padding area, which creates internal spacing and is transparent by default; next comes the border area, which forms the perimeter around the padding; and finally, the margin area extends outward from the border, providing external spacing that separates the box from adjacent elements. These layers together determine the box's overall footprint in the layout, with margins being the outermost and not part of the element's background or border styling.
The box-sizing property controls how the declared width and height values are interpreted, affecting the calculation of the box's total size. By default, box-sizing: content-box applies, where the content area's dimensions exclude padding and border, resulting in a total width of content width + left (/page/Padding) + right (/page/Padding) + left (/page/Border) + right (/page/Border) + left margin + right margin. Alternatively, box-sizing: border-box includes the padding and border widths within the specified dimensions, simplifying layout predictions as the total width then becomes specified width + left margin + right margin, with padding and border subtracting from the content area if needed. This property, introduced in CSS3, allows developers to choose a model that better suits their design needs, with border-box often preferred for more intuitive sizing in complex layouts.
A key behavior in the box model is margin collapsing, which occurs when vertical margins of adjacent block-level elements touch without intervening content, padding, or border. In such cases, the margins merge into a single margin whose size is the maximum of the two adjoining values (or the sum if negative), rather than adding them together. This applies only to vertical marginshorizontal margins do not collapseand prevents excessive spacing in stacked block layouts, such as between paragraphs. Factors like floated elements or positioned elements can block collapsing, ensuring the model adapts to different layout contexts.
Unlike borders, which contribute to the box's layout dimensions, the outline property draws a line outside the border edge without affecting the element's position or size. Outlines can overlap other content and do not reserve space, making them ideal for non-intrusive visual cues like focus indicators, and they are rendered in a uniform style around the entire box.
Historically, early implementations like Internet Explorer 5 and 6 in quirks mode deviated from the W3C standard by using an alternative box model where padding and borders were included within the content dimensions, leading to layout discrepancies. This issue was resolved in standards mode for IE6 and later browsers, with the correct content-box model formalized in CSS Level 2 Revision 1 (CSS2.1).

Visual Formatting Model

The visual formatting model in CSS describes the process by which user agents arrange elements from the document tree into boxes and lay them out for visual media, such as screens or printed pages. This model operates primarily within the normal flow, where boxes are positioned according to their hierarchical structure and default formatting behaviors, generating either block-level or inline-level boxes based on the element's computed 'display' value. It ensures consistent rendering across continuous and paged media, though margin properties may adapt in paged contexts to account for page breaks. Recent enhancements include container queries (CSS Containment Module Level 3, Recommendation 2024), enabling responsive sizing based on parent containers rather than the viewport.
Block formatting contexts organize block-level boxes vertically, stacking them one after another from the top of the containing block to the bottom, with their left edges aligned to the containing block's left edge unless otherwise specified. Vertical margins between adjacent block boxes collapse, reducing the space to the larger of the two margins, which promotes efficient layout without excessive gaps. In contrast, inline formatting contexts arrange inline-level boxes horizontally within line boxes, flowing from left to right and respecting horizontal margins, borders, and padding, while vertical spacing properties like margins and padding apply only to the line box as a whole rather than pushing adjacent content. A block formatting context is established by elements such as block containers, floated elements, absolutely positioned elements, or block boxes with 'overflow' other than 'visible', isolating the layout of its contents from the surrounding context.
Line boxes serve as the fundamental units for inline formatting, forming rectangular areas that contain one or more inline boxes and any associated inline content, such as text or replaced elements. These line boxes stack vertically without separation between them, with their height determined by the 'line-height' property and content alignment rules, and their width constrained by the available space in the containing block after accounting for any intruding floats. When inline content exceeds the available width, it wraps to form additional line boxes, maintaining the horizontal flow while adjusting for hyphenation or other breaking rules if specified.
Replaced elements, such as images or form controls, are treated as atomic inline-level boxes within the visual formatting model, meaning they cannot be split across line boxes and possess intrinsic dimensions that influence their sizing and placement. These elements contribute to the inline flow as indivisible units, with their height and width derived from intrinsic ratios or specified values, ensuring they integrate seamlessly without disrupting the surrounding text layout.
The containing block is a key concept in the visual formatting model, defined as the rectangular reference area used to position and size descendant boxes, typically established by the nearest ancestor with a position other than 'static' or the initial containing block formed by the viewport or page area. For relatively positioned elements, the containing block is the nearest positioned ancestor, allowing offsets to be calculated relative to this reference while preserving participation in the normal flow.
The visual formatting model was originally defined in CSS Level 2, providing the foundational rules for box generation and layout in normal flow. CSS Level 2 Revision 1 (CSS 2.1) introduced enhancements to resolve ambiguities, particularly in inline formatting, such as refined handling of vertical alignment, padding, and margins on inline elements, along with clearer definitions for containing blocks and line box calculations. These updates ensure more predictable rendering across user agents, though the core model remains oriented toward normal flow, with brief transitions to non-normal schemes like floats handled separately.

Positioning Schemes

In CSS, positioning schemes determine how elements are placed in relation to the normal document flow, controlled primarily by the position property, which accepts values such as static, relative, absolute, fixed, and sticky. These schemes allow authors to override default layout behaviors, enabling precise control over element placement while interacting with the visual formatting model. The default static value places elements according to normal flow rules, where inline elements flow horizontally and block elements stack vertically, without regard for offset properties.
The relative value positions an element as if it were static, but then offsets it from its normal position using the top, right, bottom, and left properties, which shift the box visually without affecting surrounding elements' layout. Positive values for these offsets move the element inward from its normal edges (e.g., top: 10px shifts it downward), while the element occupies its original space in the flow. For relative positioning, the containing block is the same as for statictypically the nearest block-level ancestor or the initial containing block.
In contrast, absolute positioning removes the element from the normal flow, positioning it relative to its containing block, which is the nearest ancestor with a non-static position (or the initial containing block if none exists). The offset properties then place the element's edges relative to the containing block's padding edges, reducing the available space for other content. Similarly, fixed positioning also takes the element out of flow but establishes the viewport (or the page area in paged media) as the reference, or the nearest ancestor that establishes a containing block for fixed positioning (such as via transform other than none), if applicable, making the element's position invariant to scrolling.
The sticky value introduces a hybrid scheme, behaving like relative positioning until the element reaches a specified offset threshold within its scrollport, at which point it "sticks" in place like fixed, but only within the bounds of its containing block. The containing block for sticky is identical to that of static, and the offset properties define the sticky rectangle relative to the scrollport. Introduced in the CSS Positioned Layout Module Level 3 (first published as a Working Draft in 2016), sticky positioning facilitates app-like interfaces, such as persistent headers that remain visible during scrolling without disrupting layout. It achieved full cross-browser support in major engines by 2018, with Chrome from version 56, Firefox from 59, and Safari from 6.1 (with vendor prefix).
Across non-static schemes, the z-index property controls stacking order among positioned elements that overlap, assigning a stacking context where higher integer values (or auto) place elements in front, while negative values send them behind. Stacking contexts are formed by the root element and any positioned descendant with a z-index other than auto, ensuring proper layering within the document's three-dimensional space.

Flexible Box Layout (Flexbox)

The Flexible Box Layout, commonly known as Flexbox, is a CSS module that provides a one-dimensional layout model for distributing space between items within a container and aligning them along primary and secondary axes, optimizing for user interface design in complex applications and webpages. It establishes a flex formatting context when the display property of an element is set to flex or inline-flex, transforming the element into a flex container whose direct children become flex items that are laid out according to flexbox rules rather than block or inline formatting. This approach simplifies responsive designs by allowing items to grow, shrink, or reorder dynamically based on available space, offering a more intuitive alternative to older techniques like float-based centering for alignment tasks.
In Flexbox, layout is defined along two perpendicular axes: the main axis, which determines the primary direction of item arrangement, and the cross axis, which runs orthogonal to it. The flex-direction property on the flex container specifies the main axis orientation, with possible values including row (default, left-to-right in left-to-right writing modes), row-reverse, column (top-to-bottom), and column-reverse; this property also influences the start and end points of both axes and interacts with the container's writing mode. For aligning and distributing items along the main axis, the justify-content property controls spacing and alignment, such as flex-start (packing toward the start), center (centering), space-between (even distribution with no space at ends), or space-around (equal space around items). Along the cross axis, the align-items property sets the default alignment for all flex items, with options like stretch (default, expanding items to fill the cross size), flex-start, center, or baseline (aligning by text baseline).
Flex items are influenced by properties applied directly to them, such as the flex shorthand, which combines flex-grow (how much an item grows relative to others, default 0), flex-shrink (how much it shrinks under pressure, default 1), and flex-basis (initial main size before free space distribution, default auto); for example, flex: 1 allows equal growth among items. The order property adjusts the visual order of flex items independently of their source order, using integer values (default 0) to rearrange them during layout without affecting document flow. Individual items can override the container's align-items via the align-self property, which accepts the same values plus auto (inherits from align-items).
The CSS Flexible Box Layout Module Level 1 reached Candidate Recommendation status in September 2012, with stable browser support emerging by 2013 across major engines like Chrome 29, Firefox 21, and Internet Explorer 10 (though initial implementations used vendor prefixes). Flexbox has become particularly valuable for creating responsive navigation bars, where its alignment and spacing properties enable fluid adaptation to varying screen sizes without complex JavaScript.

Grid Layout

CSS Grid Layout is a two-dimensional layout system in CSS designed for creating complex, responsive page structures by arranging child elements into a flexible grid of rows and columns. Unlike one-dimensional systems, it allows simultaneous control over both axes, enabling precise positioning and sizing of grid items within defined tracks. Introduced in the CSS Grid Layout Module Level 1 as a Candidate Recommendation in 2017, it achieved full cross-browser support without prefixes among major browsers by 2017, facilitating widespread adoption for advanced responsive designs.
To create a grid container, the display property is set to grid on the parent element, transforming its direct children into grid items that can be explicitly or automatically placed within the grid. The structure of the grid is defined using grid-template-columns and grid-template-rows, which specify the number, size, and names of the column and row tracks, respectively; track sizes can be fixed (e.g., 100px), flexible (e.g., 1fr), or adaptive (e.g., auto or minmax(0, 1fr)). For example:
.grid-container {
 display: grid;
 grid-template-columns: 1fr 2fr 1fr;
 grid-template-rows: auto 1fr auto;
}
This defines three columns with proportional widths and three rows with varying sizing behaviors.
Grid items are positioned using the grid-column and grid-row properties, which reference grid lines by number or name to set the start and end positions; the span keyword allows items to occupy multiple tracks (e.g., grid-column: 1 / span 2). Named lines and areas can be declared in grid-template-columns or grid-template-rows (e.g., 1fr 2fr 1fr), enabling reusable identifiers for placement like grid-column: header-start / main-end. If positions are not explicitly set, the auto-placement algorithm sequentially fills available cells in row-major order, respecting any sparse or dense packing mode specified via grid-auto-flow. This algorithm handles overflow by creating implicit tracks as needed, ensuring items are placed without manual intervention for simpler layouts.
The CSS Grid Layout Module Level 2, advanced to Candidate Recommendation in 2020, with further updates through 2025 and remaining at Candidate Recommendation as of 2025, introduces the subgrid value for grid-template-columns and grid-template-rows, allowing a nested grid item to inherit and align its tracks with those of its parent grid in one or both dimensions. This feature enables seamless integration of subgrids, where child tracks participate in the parent's sizing calculations, ideal for maintaining consistent spacing in hierarchical designs like multi-level navigation or form layouts. Browser support for subgrid became comprehensive by late 2023 across Chrome, Firefox, Safari, and Edge.
Alignment and distribution of grid items and tracks occur independently along the inline (horizontal) and block (vertical) axes using properties like justify-items and align-items for individual item alignment within cells, and justify-content and align-content for distributing extra space among tracks when the grid is under- or over-sized. These draw from CSS Box Alignment principles, supporting values such as start, center, stretch, and space-evenly to achieve precise control over layout behavior in responsive contexts. For instance, justify-content: space-between evenly distributes columns with gaps defined by gap, row-gap, or column-gap.
CSS Grid can be combined with Flexible Box Layout (Flexbox) in hybrid approaches, where Grid handles overall page structure and Flexbox manages one-dimensional arrangements within grid items.

Dynamic and Advanced Features

Transitions and Animations

CSS transitions provide a mechanism for smoothly animating changes to CSS property values over a specified duration, allowing elements to transition gradually between states rather than changing abruptly. This feature enables implicit animations triggered by events such as hovering or focusing on an element, enhancing user interface responsiveness without requiring scripting. The CSS Transitions Module Level 1, first published as a Working Draft by the W3C in March 2009, defines the core functionality for these transitions.
The primary properties controlling transitions are transition-property, which specifies the CSS properties to animate (e.g., opacity, transform, or all for all animatable properties); transition-duration, which sets the length of the transition in seconds or milliseconds (defaulting to 0s for no animation); transition-timing-function, which dictates the easing of the animation (e.g., ease for smooth acceleration and deceleration); and transition-delay, which introduces a pause before the transition begins (defaulting to 0s). These can be combined in the shorthand transition property, such as transition: opacity 0.5s ease-in-out 0.2s;. Transitions apply to computed values and are commonly triggered by pseudo-classes like :hover or :focus, where a property change in one state animates to the value in another.
Recent advancements include the View Transitions API, part of the CSS View Transitions Module Level 1 (W3C Recommendation, March 2024), which enables smooth animated transitions between different document states or views, such as page navigations, with full support in major browsers (Chrome 111+, Firefox 121+, Safari 17.2+) as of November 2025.
CSS Animations extend transitions by allowing explicit, keyframe-based control over property changes, enabling complex sequences that repeat or reverse over time. Defined in the CSS Animations Module Level 1, first published as a Working Draft by the W3C in March 2009, animations use the @keyframes at-rule to specify intermediate states, such as @keyframes slide { from { transform: translateX(0); } to { transform: translateX(100px); } }. The animation-name property links an element to a keyframe rule (e.g., slide), while animation-duration sets the cycle length, animation-iteration-count determines repetitions (e.g., infinite for continuous loops), and animation-direction controls playback (e.g., alternate to reverse on odd iterations). Additional properties include animation-timing-function for easing (default ease) and animation-fill-mode (e.g., forwards to retain final keyframe styles after completion). The shorthand animation combines these, as in animation: slide 2s ease-in-out infinite alternate;.
CSS Animations Level 2 introduces scroll-driven animations, allowing animations to progress based on scroll position rather than time, with support in major browsers (Chrome 115+, Firefox 112+, Safari 17.3+) as of November 2025, enhancing dynamic effects like parallax scrolling.
Timing functions in both transitions and animations define the rate of change, with predefined options like linear for constant speed, ease-in-out for gradual start and end, or custom curves via cubic-bezier(x1, y1, x2, y2) for precise control (e.g., cubic-bezier(0.25, 0.1, 0.25, 1) for a subtle bounce effect). These functions interpolate between values, ensuring smooth progression without abrupt jumps.
For optimal performance, animations and transitions should prioritize properties like transform and opacity, which are composited on the GPU and avoid triggering costly layout recalculations (reflows) or repaints, unlike animating width, height, or margin. This approach leverages hardware acceleration, which became a standard optimization in major browsers by around 2015, resulting in smoother 60fps rendering on capable devices.

Custom Properties and Values

CSS custom properties, also known as CSS variables, allow authors to define reusable values within stylesheets, enabling dynamic and maintainable styling. They are introduced in the CSS Custom Properties for Cascading Variables Module Level 1, which became a Candidate Recommendation in 2015. These properties function as a primitive value type accepted by all CSS properties, substituting for hardcoded values to reduce repetition and facilitate updates.
Custom properties are declared using a name prefixed with two hyphens followed by a colon and value, such as --primary-color: #0066cc;. The name must start with -- and can include letters, numbers, hyphens, and underscores, making it case-sensitive. If no value is provided, the property defaults to an "unresolved" state, treated as invalid in most contexts. To use a custom property, the var() function references it by name, optionally with a fallback value, as in color: var(--primary-color, blue);. This substitution occurs at computed value time, allowing the variable to cascade and inherit like standard properties.
The scope of custom properties is element-specific, declared on any element or pseudo-element, and they participate fully in the CSS cascade and inheritance model. When set on an element, the value is inherited by its descendants unless overridden locally, enabling hierarchical theming across a document tree. For instance, a root-level declaration like :root { --spacing-unit: 1rem; } can propagate spacing values throughout the page, simplifying global adjustments. This inheritance behavior mirrors that of other CSS properties, but custom properties remain unresolved until substitution, preserving flexibility in value resolution.
Common use cases include theming, where colors, fonts, or breakpoints are centralized for easy theme switching, such as defining --brand-color: hsl(200, 100%, 50%); at the document root and referencing it in multiple rules. They also support internationalization by isolating translatable strings, like --nav-next: "Next";, which can be updated without altering layout rules. By reducing duplication, custom properties enhance maintainability, particularly in large stylesheets, and enable runtime modifications via JavaScript for interactive effects.
The @property at-rule, part of the CSS Properties and Values API Level 1 from the Houdini project, extends custom properties by allowing explicit registration of types, inheritance, and initial values directly in CSS. Its syntax is @property --prop-name { syntax: <type>; inherits: <boolean>; initial-value: <value>; }, where <type> specifies primitives like <length>, <color>, or <number>, supporting combinators for complex syntaxes. For example, @property --my-length { syntax: "<length>"; inherits: false; initial-value: 0px; } ensures type-checked values with no inheritance and a default of 0px. This rule, published as a Working Draft in March 2024, provides partial browser support as of 2025, with approximately 93% global coverage across modern browsers like Chrome 85+, Firefox 128+, and Safari 16.4+. Typed custom properties enable smoother animations by interpolating values according to their registered syntax.

Media Queries

Media queries in CSS enable authors to apply styles conditionally based on characteristics of the output device, such as its dimensions, capabilities, or user preferences, allowing for adaptive layouts that respond to diverse environments like screens of varying sizes or print media.
The fundamental syntax uses the @media at-rule, structured as @media <media-query-list> { <stylesheet> }, where the media query list can include a media type (e.g., screen or all), one or more media features in parentheses (e.g., (min-width: 600px)), and logical operators like and, or, or not to combine conditions. For instance, @media (min-width: 600px) { body { background-color: lightblue; } } applies the rule only when the viewport width exceeds 600 pixels.
Core media features include dimension-based ones like width and height, which are range features accepting length values to query the viewport's inline or block dimensions (e.g., (width >= 30em) or (max-height: 20em)); orientation, a discrete feature with values portrait or landscape to detect device rotation; and resolution, a range feature using resolution units like dpi or dppx (e.g., (resolution <= 2dppx) for low-density displays). These features support logical variants, such as inline-size and block-size, which adapt to the document's writing mode (e.g., horizontal or vertical) rather than physical directions, ensuring queries remain direction-agnostic in internationalized content (e.g., (inline-size > 45em) for right-to-left scripts).
Introduced in 2019 with initial browser support in major engines like Chrome 76, the prefers-color-scheme media feature detects user preferences for color themes, accepting discrete values light, dark, or no-preference to enable automatic adaptation to system-wide dark mode settings (e.g., @media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) { body { background: #000; color: #fff; } }).
Container queries, defined in the CSS Containment Module Level 3 (published August 2022 as a Candidate Recommendation), extend media queries by conditioning styles on a parent container's properties rather than the global viewport, facilitating component-level responsiveness. To use them, an element is established as a container via container-type: size or container-type: inline-size (querying only inline dimensions), followed by an @container rule like @container (inline-size > 300px) { .card { flex-direction: row; } }, which applies when the container exceeds the threshold. By mid-2024, container queries achieved broad browser support across Chrome 105+, Firefox 110+, Safari 16+, and Edge 105+, enabling widespread adoption for modular designs.
Media Queries Level 5 (Working Draft as of December 2021, with ongoing refinements including 2024 updates via CSS Working Group issues) introduces enhancements like custom media queries for reusable aliases (e.g., @custom-media --wide-screen (min-width: 1200px);) and scripting integration for dynamic conditions, alongside style-based querying capabilities that evaluate container styles (e.g., font size or color scheme) in addition to size. These advancements build on prior levels to support more flexible, environment-aware styling.
Media queries are essential for mobile-first design, where base styles target small screens by default and progressive enhancements use min-width queries to adapt for larger viewports, prioritizing performance and usability on resource-constrained devices that represent the majority of web traffic.

Pseudo-classes and Pseudo-elements

Pseudo-classes and pseudo-elements extend CSS selectors by allowing styling based on element states, positions, or generated content without modifying the underlying HTML structure. Pseudo-classes, denoted by a single colon (e.g., :hover), target elements in specific conditions such as user interactions or structural positions, while pseudo-elements, denoted by double colons (e.g., ::before), represent virtual elements for inserting or styling portions of content. These features enhance dynamic styling and reduce the need for additional markup, with pseudo-classes increasing selector specificity equivalent to a class selector.
Common pseudo-classes include :hover and :focus for user interactions. The :hover pseudo-class matches an element when the pointing device is over it or one of its descendants, enabling visual feedback like changing a link's color on mouseover. For example:
a:hover {
 color: blue;
}
This styles hyperlinks blue when hovered. The :focus pseudo-class applies to elements receiving keyboard or other input focus, such as form fields, supporting accessibility by highlighting active controls.
Structural pseudo-classes like :nth-child(n) allow selecting elements based on their position among siblings. The :nth-child(n) functional pseudo-class matches elements that are the nth child of their parent, where n can be a number, keyword (e.g., odd, even), or formula like 2n+1; it supports type-specific selection when combined with an element type. For instance:
li:nth-child(odd) {
 background-color: lightgray;
}
This alternates row colors in a list. The :not() pseudo-class negates a selector list, matching elements that do not match any argument, excluding empty or invalid lists; it accepts up to 20 simple selectors in Level 4. An example is:
p:not(.special) {
 font-style: italic;
}
which italicizes paragraphs except those with class "special." The :is() pseudo-class matches any element in its selector list, forgiving invalid arguments and computing specificity based on the least specific option, reducing redundancy in complex selectors as per Selectors Level 4 (Working Draft, 2022).
Dynamic pseudo-classes handle form and validation states. The :checked pseudo-class selects user interface elements like checkboxes or radio buttons that are checked or toggled on. For validation, :valid targets form controls meeting their validity constraints (e.g., required fields with input), while :invalid selects those failing constraints, aiding error styling without JavaScript. Example usage:
input:invalid {
 border-color: red;
}
This highlights invalid inputs with a red border.
The :has() relational pseudo-class, introduced in Selectors Level 4 and widely implemented by 2025, matches an element if it contains a descendant, child, or subsequent sibling matching the relative selector argument, enabling parent and conditional selection that previously required workarounds. For example:
article:has(h2) {
 font-weight: bold;
}
This bolds articles containing an <h2> heading, addressing common targeting limitations.
Pseudo-elements generate or style content fragments. The ::before and ::after pseudo-elements insert generated content before or after an element's actual content, respectively, using the content property; they are fully styleable and create anonymous boxes in the render tree. Common for icons or decorations:
q::before {
 content: '"';
}
This adds opening quotes before <q> elements. The ::first-line pseudo-element styles the first formatted line of a block container, limited to properties like font and color to preserve layout integrity. Similarly, ::selection applies to selected text portions, restricted to color, background-color, and text-shadow for user-highlighted content across browsers. It applies to user-selected content throughout the document, including selected text within editable elements such as input, textarea, and similar form controls. Example:
::selection {
 background: yellow;
}
This yellow-highlights selected text. To customize the selection appearance specifically in input fields and textareas:
input::selection,
textarea::selection {
 background: #3399ff;
 color: white;
}

input::-moz-selection,
textarea::-moz-selection {
 background: #3399ff;
 color: white;
}
This sets a blue background and white text for selected content in these elements. The ::selection pseudo-element is supported in modern browsers (Chrome, Edge, Safari, Firefox), though the prefixed ::-moz-selection provides compatibility with legacy Firefox versions. Support may vary for certain input types (e.g., input may not fully support custom selection styling), and only color and background-color are reliably supported across implementations. These features, defined in CSS Pseudo-Elements Module Level 4 (Working Draft, June 2025), integrate seamlessly with the visual formatting model for enhanced presentation control.

History and Evolution

Early Development (CSS1)

The origins of Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) trace back to October 1994, when Hkon Wium Lie, then working at CERNthe birthplace of the World Wide Webproposed "Cascading HTML Style Sheets" as a mechanism to enhance web document presentation without embedding stylistic instructions directly into HTML markup. This initiative was spurred by the limitations of early HTML, which relied on inline tags like <font> for formatting, blurring the separation between content structure and visual design; Lie's proposal sought to remedy this by introducing external style sheets that could cascade priorities between author preferences and user settings. Influenced by ongoing discussions with Tim Berners-Lee and Dave Raggett at CERN, the proposal outlined core ideas such as property-value pairs for attributes like font size and background color, weighted influence levels for style resolution, and support for multiple media types including visual and print.
Lie soon collaborated with Bert Bos, a developer working on style sheets for his experimental Argo browser, to advance the concept. The two met in person at the Fourth International World Wide Web Conference in April 1995 and merged their approaches, with Bos contributing ideas from his earlier work on structured document formatting. This partnership laid the groundwork for standardization under the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), where they co-authored the evolving specification amid input from the broader web community via the www-style mailing list.
The culmination of these efforts was CSS Level 1, finalized as a W3C Recommendation on December 17, 1996, marking a pivotal milestone in web styling. This initial specification focused on simplicity, defining basic selectorssuch as element types (e.g., h1), classes (e.g., .class), IDs (e.g., #id), and contextual combinations (e.g., h1 em)along with 23 properties to control essential aspects of presentation, including fonts (font-family, font-size), colors (color, background-color), margins (margin-top, margin-right), text alignment (text-align), and borders (border-style). These features enabled authors to attach styles to HTML documents while allowing inheritance and cascading to resolve conflicts, promoting a box-based formatting model where elements were treated as rectangular boxes with padding, borders, and spacing.
Despite its formal recommendation, CSS1's adoption encountered significant hurdles in the late 1990s browser wars, as major players like Netscape and Microsoft prioritized proprietary extensionssuch as Netscape's <layer> tag and Internet Explorer's Dynamic HTMLover full compliance with the standard. Initial support emerged with Internet Explorer 3 in August 1996, which implemented a subset of properties, but Netscape Navigator 4.0's release in 1997 introduced buggy and partial rendering that often conflicted with these extensions, leading to inconsistent cross-browser experiences and slowing widespread uptake. This resistance highlighted the tension between innovation and interoperability in the early web ecosystem.

CSS2 and Revisions

CSS Level 2, or CSS2, was released as a W3C Recommendation on May 12, 1998, significantly expanding the capabilities of CSS beyond the foundational elements of CSS1. It introduced advanced layout features, including relative, absolute, and fixed positioning, which enabled developers to control element placement more precisely on the page. CSS2 also added support for table layouts, allowing structured data to be styled with properties like border-collapse and table-layout for rendering tabular content. Furthermore, the specification incorporated media types to target different output devices, such as visual screens, printers, and aural devices, along with aural styles for speech synthesis. In total, CSS2 defined approximately 115 properties, covering aspects like fonts, colors, backgrounds, and user interface elements.
A key innovation in CSS2 was the introduction of print media support through the @media print rule, which allowed authors to create styles optimized for paged output, such as adjusting margins, hiding navigation elements, and controlling page breaksfeatures that influenced later standards for paged media and document formatting.
Despite these advancements, CSS2 faced challenges with browser implementations, particularly in early versions of Internet Explorer (IE5 and IE6), which introduced incompatibilities that hindered cross-browser consistency. The most prominent issue was the box model bug, where IE incorrectly included padding and borders within an element's specified width and height, rather than adding them outside as per the CSS2 specification, leading to oversized layouts. IE also exhibited bugs with floating elements, such as improper clearing and positioning offsets, which caused unpredictable wrapping and alignment issues in multi-column layouts.
To resolve these problems, clarify ambiguities, and incorporate years of errata reports, the W3C developed CSS Level 2 Revision 1 (CSS 2.1), which became a Recommendation on June 7, 2011. CSS 2.1 fixed numerous technical errors from the original CSS2, including refinements to the calculation of widths and heights for absolutely positioned elements and better definitions of property inheritance in complex document structures. It also removed underdeveloped features like aural styles, which had seen limited implementation and were deferred for potential inclusion in future speech-related modules. These revisions stabilized the core CSS2 framework, providing a reliable foundation that supported the shift toward the modular specifications of CSS3.

CSS3 Modules and CSS4

The development of CSS entered a new phase in the 2000s with the introduction of a modular specification approach under the umbrella of CSS3, marking a departure from the monolithic structure of earlier levels. Rather than a single comprehensive document, CSS3 consists of independent modules, each addressing specific aspects of styling and layout, allowing for targeted development and implementation. This modularization, outlined in the W3C's CSS3 roadmap, facilitates parallel progress on features while maintaining interoperability. Snapshots, such as the CSS Snapshot documents, periodically compile stable modules to represent the current state of CSS, but there is no unified "CSS3" specification.
Key modules exemplify this evolution, with several achieving candidate recommendation status during the 2000s and 2010s. For instance, the CSS Backgrounds and Borders Module Level 3, which extends capabilities for multiple backgrounds, rounded corners, and image-based borders, reached candidate recommendation in 2012. Similarly, the CSS Flexible Box Layout Module Level 1, enabling flexible one-dimensional layouts for user interfaces, advanced to candidate recommendation in 2016. The CSS Grid Layout Module Level 1, introducing a two-dimensional grid system for complex page layouts, followed in 2017 as a candidate recommendation. Other foundational modules include Selectors Level 3, which defines patterns for matching elements and was recommended in 2018 after drafts dating back to 2000, and Colors Level 3, specifying color values and opacity, recommended in 2011 following early 2000s development.
The term "CSS4" emerged informally in the community to refer to subsequent advancements, but it does not denote a distinct version; instead, it loosely describes modules advancing to Level 4 and beyond, developed independently. For example, Selectors Level 4, extending matching capabilities with new pseudo-classes like :has() and :is(), remains a working draft as of 2022. This leveling per module, as clarified in W3C snapshots, allows features like enhanced selectors or alignment to mature at different paces without waiting for a comprehensive release. By 2020, the CSS Working Group had produced over 100 such modules, enabling faster innovation and vendor experimentation during the drafting phase.
Standardization of these modules follows the W3C process, progressing from working draftsopen for feedback and revisionsthrough last call for comments, candidate recommendation for interoperability testing, proposed recommendation for review, and finally to W3C recommendation, signifying broad implementation and stability. This structured pathway, governed by the W3C Process Document, ensures modules integrate seamlessly into the CSS ecosystem while accommodating the modular framework's flexibility.

Recent Developments and Standardization

In recent years, the CSS Working Group (CSSWG) has continued to advance the language through its modular specification approach, emphasizing stability and interoperability for post-2020 features. The CSS Snapshot 2023, published as a W3C Group Note on December 7, 2023, compiles the stable modules forming the core of CSS at that time, including the CSS Containment Module Level 1 for container queries and the CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 4, which supports cascade layers via the @layer rule. This snapshot serves implementers by defining reliable specifications, excluding unstable drafts to ensure consistency across user agents. Similarly, the CSS Snapshot 2025, released on September 18, 2025, updates this compilation to reflect further maturation, retaining stable elements like container queries while noting ongoing progress in related areas such as color handling.
Key advancements include the CSS Anchor Positioning Module Level 1, updated as a Working Draft on October 7, 2025, which extends absolute positioning to allow elements to align relative to designated "anchor" elements, facilitating popover-like placements with automatic fallback adjustments for overflow. This enables more dynamic layouts, such as tooltips or dropdowns, by using properties like position-anchor and anchor() to reference edges or areas of anchors without relying on JavaScript. Complementing this, the CSS Color Adjustment Module Level 1, advanced to Candidate Recommendation on August 12, 2025, provides controls for user agents to adapt colors based on preferences, including dark mode via the color-scheme property and contrast enhancements in forced colors mode to improve accessibility.
The Houdini suite of APIs has seen continued development since 2023, enabling deeper customization of CSS rendering. The CSS Properties and Values API Level 1, a Working Draft from March 20, 2024, introduces the @property rule for registering custom properties with defined syntax, inheritance, and initial values, allowing precise control beyond standard variables. Building on this, the CSS Painting API Level 1, at Candidate Recommendation since 2018 with refinements post-2023, supports the paint() function for creating custom visual effects, such as dynamic graphics that respond to style changes. These APIs empower developers to extend CSS natively, integrating with the browser's rendering pipeline for performance-oriented customizations.
As of November 2025, further updates include an updated Candidate Recommendation Draft for the CSS Flexible Box Layout Module Level 1 on October 14, 2025, refining flex layout features, and a new Working Draft for the CSS Anchor Positioning Module Level 2 on October 21, 2025, extending anchoring capabilities.
Standardization efforts by the CSSWG follow the W3C process, where modules progress from Candidate Recommendation (CR)focusing on interoperability testingto Proposed Recommendation and ultimately Recommendation status upon demonstrating two independent, conforming implementations. Interoperability is rigorously tested using the Web Platform Tests (WPT) suite, ensuring consistent behavior across browsers before advancement. The CSSWG's charter, renewed on 17 March 2025 and extending through 17 March 2027, prioritizes horizontal reviews for accessibilitysuch as navigation aids and impact assessmentsand performance optimizations in all modules.

Implementation

Browser Support

Browser support for CSS has evolved significantly since its inception, with modern browsers achieving near-universal compatibility for core features by 2025. As of November 2025, over 97% of global browser usage supports essential CSS3 modules, enabling developers to rely on them without widespread fallbacks, though legacy browsers like Internet Explorer 11 (released in 2014) and pre-Chromium Edge versions continue to pose challenges due to incomplete implementation of advanced selectors, layouts, and animations.
Key CSS layout modules illustrate this progression. The CSS Flexible Box Layout (Flexbox), standardized in 2012, saw partial support in early implementationssuch as Chrome versions 420 (20082012) requiring vendor prefixes and missing features like automatic minimum sizingbut achieved full unprefixed support in Chrome 21 (July 2012), Firefox 28 (March 2014), Safari 6.1 (October 2012), and Edge 12 (July 2015). Similarly, CSS Grid Layout, introduced in 2017, gained full support across major browsers starting with Chrome 57 (April 2017), Firefox 52 (March 2017), Safari 10.1 (March 2017), and Edge 16 (April 2017), though earlier Edge versions (1215) offered only partial compatibility based on an outdated specification.
More recent features demonstrate ongoing standardization efforts. The :has() relational pseudo-class, which allows parent selectors for more efficient styling, received full support in Chrome 105 and Edge 105 (September 2022), Safari 15.4 (March 2022), and Firefox 121 (December 2023), with earlier versions requiring experimental flags in some browsers. Global adoption stands at approximately 93% for :has(), reflecting its rapid uptake in modern engines.
To address inconsistencies, particularly in partial support scenarios, developers use progressive enhancement strategies, layering basic CSS for broad compatibility before adding advanced features that enhance the experience in supporting browsers. This approach ensures accessibility and functionality across diverse environments without relying on experimental vendor prefixes for production code.
FeatureChrome (Full Support)Firefox (Full Support)Safari (Full Support)Edge (Full Support)Global Usage (%)
Flexbox21 (2012)28 (2014)6.1 (2012)12 (2015)95.23
CSS Grid57 (2017)52 (2017)10.1 (2017)16 (2017)94.91
:has()105 (2022)121 (2023)15.4 (2022)105 (2022)92.62
Data sourced from CanIUse.com as of November 2025; partial support in older versions often involves prefixed properties or limited sub-features.

Vendor Prefixes

Vendor prefixes in CSS are non-standard identifiers prefixed to CSS property names or values to implement experimental or proprietary features specific to a browser's rendering engine. Common prefixes include -webkit- for WebKit/Blink-based browsers (such as Safari and Chrome), -moz- for Mozilla Firefox, -ms- for Microsoft Edge and Internet Explorer, and -o- for the Opera browser. For example, the syntax might appear as -webkit-flex: 1; to apply a flexible box layout in WebKit engines.
The primary purpose of vendor prefixes is to enable browser vendors to test and develop new CSS features without interfering with the final standardized versions or breaking existing web content that relies on standard syntax. This allows vendors to experiment in a controlled manner, gathering feedback and refining implementations before the feature reaches the Candidate Recommendation stage in the W3C process. A notable example is the -webkit-gradient property, introduced by WebKit in 2007 for creating linear and radial gradients, which predated the standardized linear-gradient() and radial-gradient() functions in CSS3. By isolating experimental features, prefixes prevent conflicts where a vendor's early implementation might differ from the eventual standard.
Vendor prefixes originated with the WebKit engine in 2007, marking a formal adoption for features like gradients to accelerate innovation while maintaining compatibility. However, their widespread use led to historical adoption challenges, such as developers relying on prefixes long after standardization, complicating maintenance. Best practices recommend declaring the prefixed version followed by the unprefixed standard property to ensure graceful degradation and future-proofing; for instance:
transition: -webkit-transition: all 0.3s ease;
transition: all 0.3s ease;
This approach allows older browsers to use the prefix while newer ones ignore it and apply the standard rule.
By 2020, most vendor prefixes had become unnecessary for modern web development due to improved browser interoperability and the maturation of CSS standards, with only a small subset required for legacy support. This reduction stemmed from enhanced coordination among vendors following intensive discussions in 2012, which prompted policies like Blink's 2013 commitment to limit new prefixes and WebKit's 2016 shift away from prefixing experimental features. Tools such as Autoprefixer, a PostCSS plugin, automate the addition and removal of prefixes based on target browser support data from Can I Use, streamlining workflows and minimizing manual intervention. As a result, developers are encouraged to avoid writing prefixes manually and instead rely on these processors to deprecate them progressively.

Debugging and Tools

Browser developer tools provide essential functionality for inspecting and debugging CSS in real-time. In Google Chrome's DevTools, the Elements panel's Inspector allows developers to select DOM elements and view their associated CSS rules, while the Styles pane displays both specified and computed values, enabling live editing and visualization of style inheritance. Similarly, Mozilla Firefox's Developer Tools offer an Inspector for element selection and a Rules view in the Styles panel that shows computed styles alongside user-agent and author rules, facilitating the identification of style conflicts. These tools help developers trace rendering issues by highlighting active rules and inactive ones due to overrides.
For validating CSS syntax and conformance to standards, the W3C CSS Validation Service checks documents against CSS specifications, reporting errors such as invalid properties or values via URI, file upload, or direct input. Linters like Stylelint extend this by enforcing coding conventions and detecting potential errors in CSS, SCSS, or Less files, with over 100 built-in rules configurable via a JavaScript object or YAML file. Stylelint integrates into build processes or editors to provide immediate feedback during development.
Performance optimization tools aid in analyzing CSS efficiency. Google Lighthouse, an open-source automated auditing tool, evaluates CSS metrics as part of its performance score, including unused CSS contributions to load times and suggestions for minification or removal. Coverage analysis in Chrome DevTools records resource usage during page interactions, highlighting unused CSS bytes in a visual report to guide purging efforts and reduce bundle sizes.
In framework-based workflows, tools like the Tailwind CSS CLI support purging unused styles during production builds by scanning source files and retaining only referenced classes, significantly minimizing output file sizes. The CSS containment property, specified in the CSS Containment Module Level 2, enables developers to apply values such as contain: layout style paint to isolate an element's subtree, limiting style propagation and aiding debugging by scoping changes without broader reflows. Browser inspectors often visualize CSS specificity by displaying selector weights (e.g., inline, ID, class, element) when hovering over rules in the Styles pane.

Benefits and Challenges

Advantages

One of the primary advantages of CSS is its facilitation of the separation between content and presentation, allowing HTML to focus on structure while CSS handles visual styling. This separation simplifies website maintenance by enabling developers to update styles across an entire site without altering the underlying HTML code, and it supports multiple presentation formats, such as screen displays and print versions, through alternative stylesheets.
External CSS files promote site-wide consistency by centralizing styles in a single or few reusable files, which reduces redundancy and ensures uniform appearance across pages without duplicating code in individual HTML documents. This approach streamlines development for large websites, as changes to layout, colors, or typography can be applied globally from one location, enhancing efficiency and brand coherence.
From a performance perspective, linking to external CSS files allows browsers to cache them, minimizing repeated downloads and reducing bandwidth usage on subsequent page loads compared to embedding styles inline within HTML. This results in smaller HTML file sizes and faster overall loading times, particularly beneficial for users with limited connectivity or on multi-page sites.
CSS enhances accessibility by incorporating user-centric features, such as the prefers-reduced-motion media query, which detects operating system settings to minimize or eliminate animations and transitions for individuals sensitive to motion, thereby respecting diverse user needs without requiring additional scripting.
Additionally, CSS enables responsive web design through media queries, which adapt layouts and styles to various device screen sizes and orientations purely with declarative rules, eliminating the need for JavaScript and ensuring fluid, device-agnostic experiences.

Limitations

CSS lacks native scoping mechanisms for styles without relying on positioning or external technologies like Shadow DOM, leading to global rule leakage where selectors can inadvertently affect elements outside their intended scope. This global nature of the cascade means that styles defined in one part of a stylesheet may override or conflict with those in another, complicating maintenance in large projects. While CSS Cascade Layers (introduced in CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 5) provide some organization by controlling specificity and order, they do not fully encapsulate styles to prevent leakage, requiring developers to use highly specific selectors or preprocessors as workarounds.
Pseudo-classes, such as :hover, introduce dynamic behaviors based on user interactions that are difficult to control or disable purely through CSS, often necessitating JavaScript interventions. For instance, to prevent a :hover effect on an element, developers must apply properties like pointer-events: none, which disables all interactions, or use media queries and prefers-reduced-motion to mitigate but not eliminate the behavior. This uncontrollability stems from pseudo-classes being inherently tied to browser events, limiting fine-grained management without additional scripting, which can impact accessibility and performance.
Native CSS does not support rule naming or mixins, resulting in repetitive code for similar styling patterns and hindering modular development. Developers rely on preprocessors like Sass, which offer @mixin directives to define reusable blocks of styles, to avoid duplicating declarations across rulesets. Efforts to introduce native CSS functions and mixins are underway in the CSS Working Group, but as of 2025, these remain proposals without full implementation, perpetuating the need for build tools.
Targeting specific text or elements without additional markup is constrained in CSS, with pseudo-classes like :target limited to URL fragment identifiers and :has() providing relational selection but not comprehensive text-level control. The :target pseudo-class only activates on elements matching the document's URL hash, making it unsuitable for dynamic or non-link-based targeting, while :has() (stable since 2023) allows selecting parents based on children but requires existing structure and does not enable arbitrary text manipulation without classes or IDs. The newer ::target-text pseudo-element addresses scrolling to specific text fragments but does not resolve broader issues of markup-free selection.
CSS exhibits gaps in advanced layout and interaction capabilities, such as the absence of built-in state machines for managing complex UI transitions, requiring simulations via pseudo-classes, checkboxes, or JavaScript. For irregular grid layouts, masonry arrangements remain experimental; as of 2025, the masonry value for grid-template-rows in CSS Grid Layout Module Level 3 is available for developer testing in browsers like Chrome and Edge but lacks full cross-browser standardization, forcing reliance on JavaScript libraries or multi-column hacks.
While container queries, which have gained wide browser support since 2023 but remain in Working Draft status as of 2025, mitigate some component isolation challenges by allowing styles to respond to a container's size rather than the viewport, they do not fully resolve global scoping issues, as rules still cascade beyond the container unless combined with other techniques like layers. This partial addressing highlights ongoing limitations in creating truly self-contained components without markup dependencies.

Standardization Process

The standardization of CSS is managed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) through the CSS Working Group (CSSWG), which has been active since February 28, 1997, as part of W3C's efforts to develop and maintain web standards. The CSSWG operates as an open process, primarily driven by implementations from browser vendors, while incorporating input from developers and other stakeholders to ensure interoperability and evolution of the language. The group consists of representatives from major browser vendors such as Adobe and Microsoft, active specification editors, test leads, and invited experts, with opportunities for non-members to contribute technical submissions under the W3C Patent Policy. It holds weekly one-hour teleconferences for ongoing discussions and up to four face-to-face meetings per year, including during W3C's annual Technical Plenary week, using consensus-based decision-making as outlined in the W3C Process Document.
Specifications progress through defined maturity stages to balance innovation with stability. An Editor's Draft represents the initial authoring phase, often hosted on the CSSWG's public repositories. This advances to a Working Draft (WD), an early public version intended to gather broad feedback without implying endorsement. Upon sufficient development, it becomes a Candidate Recommendation (CR), a complete specification ready for widespread testing and potential revisions based on implementation experience. Further validation leads to Proposed Recommendation (PR), requiring a comprehensive test suite and at least two independent, interoperable implementations. Finally, it achieves W3C Recommendation (REC) status as a stable, endorsed standard, subject only to errata corrections thereafter. This iterative process emphasizes testing and implementation reports to guide advancement.
To provide overviews of CSS's state, the CSSWG publishes periodic Snapshots, such as the CSS Snapshot 2025 released on September 18, 2025, as a W3C Group Note. These documents compile stable modules across CSS levelsdrawing from foundational Levels 13 and modular extensions beyondinto a single profile for implementers, highlighting reliable features without regard to current browser adoption rates. Snapshots have been issued roughly every one to two years since 2007, serving as accessible entry points to the modular CSS ecosystem.
Community involvement is integral, with public input solicited through mechanisms like GitHub issues on the CSSWG drafts repository, public mailing lists, and feedback during WD and CR phases. The CSSWG also coordinates horizontal reviews with the W3C Technical Architecture Group (TAG) to address cross-cutting concerns such as privacy, security, and architectural extensibility, often via task forces like Houdini. This vendor-led yet collaborative approach ensures CSS evolves responsively while prioritizing widespread implementation.

References

CSS: Cascading Style Sheets - MDN Web Docs

CSS Snapshot 2025 - W3C

Cascading Style Sheets - W3C

A brief history of CSS until 2016 - W3C

Alignment, font styles, and horizontal rules in HTML documents

CSS Snapshot 2023 - W3C

Media Queries Level 3 - W3C

CSS Animations Level 1 - W3C

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_selectors

CSS Object Model (CSSOM) - Web APIs | MDN

DOMTokenList: toggle() method - Web APIs - MDN Web Docs

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#statements

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#tokenization

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#ruleset

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#declaration

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#whitespace

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#comments

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#at-rules

Style Sheets in HTML documents - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#characters

Selectors Level 4 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#type-selectors

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#class-html

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#id-selectors

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#universal-selector

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#attribute-selectors

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#descendant-combinators

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#child-combinators

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#adjacent-sibling-combinators

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#general-sibling-combinators

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#grouping

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#has-pseudo

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-syntax-3/#declaration

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/syndata.html#declarations

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/propidx.html

CSS Values and Units Module Level 4 - W3C

CSS Fonts Module Level 4 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-values-4/#value-defs

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-values-4/#lengths

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#specifying-colors

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-values-4/#absolute-lengths

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-values-4/#relative-lengths

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-values-4/#calc-notation

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-3/#shorthands

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-4/#font-prop

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/about.html#shorthand

CSS Syntax Module Level 3 - W3C

CSS Conditional Rules Module Level 3 - W3C

CSS Conditional Rules Module Level 5 - W3C

CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 5 - W3C

CSS Nesting Module - W3C

Cascading Style Sheets, level 1 - W3C

CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 4 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#cascading-origins

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-4/#cascade-sort

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#importance

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#layering

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#declaring-layers

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#cascade-sort

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#defaulting

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#specificity-rules

CSS Cascading and Inheritance Level 6 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/cascade.html#specificity

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-3/#specificity

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/cascade.html#important-rules

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#specificity-rules

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-4/#inheriting

Inheritance - CSS - MDN Web Docs

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-4/#initial-values

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-4/#defaulting-keywords

Box model - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-box-3/#the-css-box-model

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/box.html#box-dimensions

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-sizing-3/#box-sizing

https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/box.html#collapsing-margins

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-box-3/#collapsing-margins

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-ui-4/#outline-props

Quirks mode and strict mode - CSS

9 Visual formatting model - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#position-property

CSS Positioned Layout Module Level 3 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#static-position

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#relative-position

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#offset-properties

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#def-cb

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#abspos-positioning

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#abspos-sizing

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#fixed-positioning

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#sticky-pos

CSS Positioned Layout Module Level 3 - W3C

CSS position:sticky | Can I use... Support tables for HTML5, CSS3, etc

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#z-index

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-position-3/#painting-order

CSS Flexible Box Layout Module Level 1 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/#flex-containers

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/#flex-direction-property

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/#justify-content-property

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/#align-items-property

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/#flex-property

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/#order-property

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/#align-self-property

The Future of CSS: Flexbox Is a Game Changer - WIRED

Aligning items in a flex container - CSS - MDN Web Docs

CSS Grid Layout Module Level 1 - W3C

CSS Grid Layout Module Level 1 - W3C

CSS Grid Layout (level 1) | Can I use... Support tables for ... - CanIUse

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#grid-container

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#track-sizing

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#placement

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#line-names

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#grid-auto-flow-property

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#implicit-grid

CSS Grid Layout Module Level 2 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-2/#subgrids

CSS Subgrid | Can I use... Support tables for HTML5, CSS3, etc

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#alignment

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#gutters

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-grid-1/#overview

CSS Transitions - W3C

CSS Easing Functions Level 1 - W3C

How to create high-performance CSS animations | Articles - web.dev

CSS Custom Properties for Cascading Variables Module Level 1

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-variables-1/#custom-property-name

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-variables-1/#initial-values

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-variables-1/#using-custom-properties

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-variables-1/#custom-property-value

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-variables-1/#example-basic-usage

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-variables-1/#resolved-value-special

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-variables-1/#priv-sec-issues

CSS Properties and Values API Level 1 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-properties-values-api-1/#at-property-rule

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-properties-values-api-1/#the-initial-value-descriptor

CSS at-rule: `@property` | Can I use... Support tables for ... - CanIUse

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-properties-values-api-1/#interpolation

Media Queries Level 4 - W3C

Media Queries Level 5 - W3C

prefers-color-scheme: Hello darkness, my old friend - web.dev

CSS Containment Module Level 3 - W3C

A Friendly Introduction to Container Queries - Josh Comeau

CSS Pseudo-Elements Module Level 4 - W3C

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#hover-pseudo

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#user-action-pseudos

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#focus-pseudo

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#nth-child-pseudo

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#the-nth-child-pseudos

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#negation-pseudo

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#matches-pseudo

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#checked-pseudo

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#validity-pseudos

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#the-validity-pseudos

https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#relational

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-pseudo-4/#generated-content

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-pseudo-4/#selectordef-before

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-pseudo-4/#first-line-styling

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-pseudo-4/#selectordef-selection

https://www.w3.org/TR/css-pseudo-4/#highlight-styling

Cascading HTML Style Sheets -- A Proposal

Cascading Style Sheets, level 1 - W3C

Cascading Style Sheets, level 2 (CSS2) Specification - W3C

IE CSS Bugs That'll Get You Every Time

Cascading Style Sheets Level 2 Revision 1 (CSS 2.1) Specification

Introduction to CSS3 - W3C

CSS Backgrounds and Borders Module Level 3

None

CSS Color Module Level 3 - W3C

CSS Snapshot 2020 - W3C

CSS Anchor Positioning - W3C

CSS Color Adjustment Module Level 1 - W3C

CSS Painting API Level 1

CSS current work & how to participate - W3C

https://wpt.fyi/results/css

CSS Working Group Charter - W3C

Can I use... Support tables for HTML5, CSS3, etc

Browser Support in 2025 - Casey Watts

CSS Flexible Box Layout Module | Can I use... Support ... - CanIUse

:has() CSS relational pseudo-class | Can I use... Support tables for ...

Vendor prefix - Glossary - MDN Web Docs

Vendor-prefixes: an idea - W3C Public mailing list archives

Is Vendor Prefixing Dead? - CSS-Tricks

postcss/autoprefixer: Parse CSS and add vendor prefixes to ... - GitHub

Technique C22:Using CSS to control visual presentation of text - W3C

Effective Use of Style Sheets - NN/G

Optimize resource loading - web.dev

C39: Using the CSS prefers-reduced-motion query to prevent motion

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_media_queries/Using_media_queries

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Selectors/Pseudo-classes

Is it Time to Un-Sass? - CSS-Tricks

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Selectors/::target-text

CSS Elevator: A Pure CSS State Machine With Floor Navigation

Brick by brick: Help us build CSS Masonry | Blog

CSS container queries - MDN Web Docs

https://www.w3.org/Style/Group/charter

CSS Working Group Charter - W3C

CSS Working Group Charter

W3C Process Document

Cascading Style Sheets Levels, snapshots, modules - W3C

CSS Pseudo-Elements Module Level 4 - ::selection

::selection - CSS | MDN
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion