Database Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 13 days ago 
Database
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A database is an organized collection of structured information, or data, typically stored electronically in a computer system and controlled by a database management system (DBMS). The DBMS acts as an interface between the database and users or applications, enabling efficient storage, retrieval, updating, management, and secure access to data while enforcing rules for data integrity, consistency, and security.
Databases support the handling of large volumes of information across diverse applications, from simple record-keeping to complex analytics, by providing mechanisms for data organization, querying (often via Structured Query Language, or SQL), and multi-user access. They ensure data remains accurate and reliable through built-in constraints and reduce redundancy by maintaining a centralized, trustworthy repository.
Databases are categorized into several main types based on data structure and use case. Relational databases organize data into tables with rows and columns, linked by keys, and rely on SQL for querying; they excel with structured data and remain dominant for applications requiring precise relationships and transactions. NoSQL (non-relational) databases accommodate unstructured or semi-structured data without fixed schemas, offering flexible models such as document stores (e.g., JSON-based), key-value stores, wide-column stores, graph databases (focused on relationships between entities), and in-memory stores for high-speed access. Other variants include object-oriented, distributed, cloud-based, and emerging autonomous databases that automate management tasks using machine learning.
These systems are foundational to modern computing, powering websites, mobile applications, enterprise operations, e-commerce, fraud detection, recommendation engines, gaming, and AI-driven analytics by enabling scalable storage, real-time processing, and data-driven decision-making. Databases have evolved from early navigational models in the 1960s1970s to relational dominance in the 1980s, the rise of NoSQL in the 21st century for big data and web-scale needs, and recent cloud and self-managing innovations for greater efficiency and agility.

Overview

Definition

A database is an organized collection of structured data, typically stored electronically in a computer system. This structure enables efficient storage, retrieval, and manipulation of information, often modeled in rows and columns within tables for relational databases, though other formats exist for non-relational types. A database is usually controlled by a database management system (DBMS), which acts as an interface between the data and users or applications, facilitating administrative tasks such as performance monitoring, backup, and recovery.
The primary purpose of a database is to manage, store, retrieve, and update large volumes of information reliably and efficiently. Databases support multi-user access, allowing simultaneous queries and modifications while maintaining data integrity (accuracy and completeness), security (through controls like role-based access), and consistency (ensuring data remains synchronized and reliable across operations). These features make databases essential for handling complex data needs beyond what simpler tools can provide.
Unlike traditional file systems, which store data in independent files without built-in mechanisms for enforcing relationships, concurrency control, or integrity constraints, databases offer centralized management to reduce redundancy and errors. Similarly, while spreadsheets are suitable for small-scale, single-user tasks involving calculations and basic data manipulation, databases are designed for larger, structured datasets with advanced querying and multi-user support. This distinction enables databases to serve as robust foundations for modern applications requiring scalability and reliability.

Key characteristics

Databases are distinguished by several essential characteristics that enable them to manage large volumes of structured data effectively, far beyond simple file storage systems. A primary trait is their self-describing nature, where the system stores not only the data but also metadata describing the structure, relationships, and constraints, allowing the database to operate independently of specific applications.
Data independence is another key property, separating the logical organization of data from physical storage and application programs; changes to storage structures or access methods do not require modifications to programs that use the data.
Databases support persistence through durability, ensuring that committed changes survive system failures, and multi-user access, enabling concurrent operations while maintaining consistency via concurrency control mechanisms.
They incorporate controlled redundancy, ideally storing each data item in one place to minimize duplication while allowing necessary replication for performance, and provide efficient querying through structured organization and optimized retrieval methods.
Core design goals include data integrity, enforced through constraints and ACID properties (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability), which guarantee that transactions complete reliably and the database transitions only between valid states.
Security restricts unauthorized access via user privileges and authentication, while consistency ensures data remains accurate and coherent across operations.
Databases encompass various types, such as relational and NoSQL, which adapt these characteristics to different use cases.

Importance and applications

Databases are the backbone of modern digital systems, storing, organizing, and managing data in ways that make it accessible, secure, and actionable across virtually every computing application. They power websites, mobile apps, enterprise platforms, and real-time analytics, enabling concurrent access, data consistency, and integration with applications at scale. Without databases, modern software systems could not efficiently handle the vast amounts of data generated daily, nor support the performance and reliability demanded by contemporary applications.
Databases enable data-driven decision-making by facilitating analysis that identifies trends, patterns, and predictions, which helps organizations operate with greater confidence and efficiency. In business, they underpin critical functions such as customer relationship management, inventory tracking, financial reporting, fraud detection, and transaction processing in banking and e-commerce. For example, relational databases manage structured customer and order data across retail locations, while other types support caching for faster website performance or storing user-generated content on social platforms.
Databases also manage large and complex datasets in scientific research and academiaincluding simulation models of real-world entities and experimental resultssupporting knowledge advancement and collaborative analysis. In government and public sectors, they support administrative operations, public service delivery, and evidence-based policy through secure, scalable information management.
Overall, databases enable scalability, data integrity, and security, making them indispensable for information management across various sectors including business, research, and public administration.

History

1960s: Navigational databases

In the 1960s, the first computerized database management systems emerged, adopting navigational approaches to data access. These systems required programmers to traverse data structures explicitly by following pointers or links between records, typically processing one record at a time in a "record-at-a-time" manner. This navigational paradigm contrasted with later declarative methods and was implemented in both hierarchical and network models.
A pioneering effort was Charles W. Bachman's Integrated Data Store (IDS), developed at General Electric. Functional specifications for IDS were completed in early 1962, with a prototype operational by the end of that year and a higher-performance version finished in 1964. IDS introduced the network data model, representing relationships between records as a graph and enabling programmers to navigate these links using commands to retrieve and process individual records. Bachman described the programmer's role as a "navigator" through these interconnected structures, and IDS supported features such as data independence, metadata management, and transaction processing enhancements by 1965.
Bachman's work heavily influenced the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL) Database Task Group, which formed to standardize database approaches. The group's 1969 report defined a network model standard, building directly on IDS concepts and including data definition and manipulation languages, schemas, and security features such as privacy locks. The CODASYL network model allowed flexible many-to-many relationships through sets, with records accessed via primary keys, set navigation, or sequential scanning.
Concurrently, IBM developed the Information Management System (IMS), a hierarchical database. Development began in 1966 in collaboration with Rockwell for NASA's Apollo program needs, with the initial version shipped in 1967 and delivered to NASA in 1968. IMS organized data in tree-like structures with parent-child relationships, requiring navigation down the hierarchy to access dependent records. It was designed for high-volume transaction processing and efficient management of complex inventories, such as rocket parts tracking, and was commercially announced in 1968 for System/360 mainframes.
These hierarchical and network systems represented the primary navigational databases of the 1960s, addressing the shift to random-access disk storage and enabling integrated data management on mainframes.

1970s: Relational model emergence

In the 1970s, the relational model fundamentally transformed database theory and practice, shifting away from the navigational approaches of the previous decade. In 1970, IBM researcher Edgar F. Codd published his landmark paper "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks," which introduced a structured way to organize data into tables (relations) linked by values rather than physical pointers or hierarchies. This approach emphasized data independence, allowing applications to access data without knowledge of its internal storage structure.
Building on Codd's theoretical foundation, practical implementations emerged later in the decade. In 1973, IBM launched the System R project to develop an industrial-scale relational database system. Led by researchers including Don Chamberlin and Raymond Boyce, the project demonstrated the model's viability through a working prototype. Chamberlin and Boyce also developed Structured Query Language (SQL) as part of System R, enabling users to express queries at a high level that the system could translate into efficient execution plans.
Concurrently, the University of California, Berkeley, initiated the INGRES project in the early 1970s as a research effort to build another early relational database system. These pioneering systemsSystem R at IBM and INGRES at Berkeleyvalidated the relational model's potential for managing large shared data banks, setting the stage for its dominance in database technology.

1980s1990s: Desktop and object-oriented databases

In the 1980s, the proliferation of personal computers drove the development of desktop databases, which brought database management capabilities to individual users and small organizations, extending beyond large-scale enterprise systems. Ashton-Tate's dBASE, initially released in 1980 for CP/M and soon ported to the IBM PC, emerged as a leading product due to its intuitive programming language, runtime interpreter architecture, and support for custom applications, quickly becoming one of the most popular PC database tools. By the mid-1980s, versions such as dBASE III (1984) and dBASE III+ (1986) enhanced usability with improved features and character-based menus, helping dBASE achieve dominant market share in PC databases during this period. Other notable desktop databases included Borland's Paradox, introduced in 1985 for DOS, which provided relational capabilities and a user-friendly interface, and products like R:BASE, reflecting the growing accessibility of database tools on personal computers.
In the early 1990s, Microsoft Access, released in November 1992, gained rapid adoption on Windows platforms through its graphical interface, integration with Microsoft Office, and ease of use for non-programmers, contributing to the transition of desktop databases toward modern graphical environments.
Concurrently, object-oriented databases arose in the late 1980s and 1990s to manage complex, interconnected data structuressuch as those in computer-aided design, multimedia, and engineering applicationswhere relational models encountered limitations in representing hierarchical or composite objects. Early prototypes included GemStone (based on Smalltalk), Vbase (using a CLU-like language), and Orion (based on CLOS), which integrated database features with object-oriented principles to minimize the impedance mismatch between programming languages and persistent storage. Commercial systems like ObjectStore (from Object Design) gained traction by the early 1990s, offering native support for object identity, encapsulation, inheritance, and complex object handling. The 1990 Object-Oriented Database System Manifesto defined essential characteristics of these systems, and standardization efforts followed, though the field faced ongoing debates over models, query languages, and commercial viability compared to established relational approaches.

2000s onward: NoSQL, NewSQL, and big data

In the late 2000s, the rapid growth of web-scale applications and internet-generated data exposed limitations in traditional relational databases, which were typically designed for single-server deployments and struggled to scale horizontally under massive workloads. This challenge spurred the rise of NoSQL databases, which prioritized distributed architectures, flexible schemas, and high availability to manage large volumes of structured, semi-structured, or unstructured data efficiently. Pioneering systems such as Google's BigTable (described in a 2006 paper) and Amazon's Dynamo (2007) demonstrated scalable, fault-tolerant designs that could span clusters of commodity servers, often trading strict consistency for partition tolerance and availability to support high-velocity applications at companies like Facebook and Twitter.
The emergence of NoSQL coincided with the big data era, which took shape in the mid-2000s as exploding data volumes, variety, and velocity overwhelmed conventional systems. The introduction of Apache Hadoop in 2005 provided a foundational framework for distributed storage and processing of massive datasets across clusters, reinforcing the need for scalable database solutions that could handle petabyte-scale data without relying on expensive vertical scaling. Big data demands accelerated adoption of distributed database designs, influencing both NoSQL's focus on horizontal scalability and the broader shift toward cloud-centric architectures that emphasized resilience and cost-effective storage.
In the early 2010s, NewSQL databases emerged to address NoSQL's trade-offssuch as limited ACID transaction support and lack of full SQL compatibilitywhile retaining relational capabilities. The term NewSQL was coined in 2011 by analyst Matthew Aslett to describe systems that combined NoSQL-style scalability for online transaction processing workloads with ACID guarantees and SQL interfaces. Google's Spanner (introduced in a 2012 paper) exemplified this approach by enabling globally distributed, strongly consistent transactions, paving the way for cloud-native NewSQL systems designed for geo-replication, fault tolerance, and elastic scaling in distributed environments. These developments reflected ongoing efforts to balance performance, consistency, and scalability in response to big data and cloud computing demands.

Classification and types

Relational databases

Relational databases organize data into structured tables, where each table consists of rows and columns. Rows represent individual records or tuples, while columns define specific attributes or fields of those records. For example, a customer table might include columns for customer ID, name, and address, with each row containing data for a unique customer.
Tables in relational databases are linked through keys. A primary key is a unique identifier for each row in a table, ensuring no duplicates and enabling precise record retrieval. A foreign key in one table references the primary key in another table, establishing relationships between tables, such as linking orders to customers. These relationships allow data from multiple tables to be combined efficiently for queries and analysis.
To reduce data redundancy and enhance integrity, relational databases employ normalization, a systematic design process that organizes data into appropriately structured tables. Normalization minimizes duplication by ensuring that related data is stored in a single place rather than repeated across records, thereby improving consistency and simplifying maintenance.
The standard language for interacting with relational databases is Structured Query Language (SQL), a standardized programming language that enables users to create, retrieve, update, delete, and manage data. SQL supports complex operations, such as joining tables based on shared keys to generate reports or insights.
Most relational database systems adhere to ACID properties to guarantee reliable transaction processing. Atomicity ensures that transactions are completed fully or not at all; consistency maintains data validity according to defined rules; isolation prevents concurrent transactions from interfering with each other; and durability guarantees that committed changes persist even after system failures. These properties make relational databases suitable for applications requiring high reliability.
Relational databases remain the most common type of database in enterprise and transactional applications due to their structured organization, robust integrity mechanisms, and widespread support.

NoSQL databases

NoSQL databases, also known as non-relational databases, are designed to store and manage data using flexible data models that do not rely on fixed tabular schemas or the relational model. They accommodate unstructured and semi-structured data efficiently, enabling developers to adapt to evolving application requirements without predefined structures. This flexibility supports rapid iteration and handles diverse data types effectively.
NoSQL databases prioritize horizontal scalability, distributing data across multiple servers to manage large volumes and high throughput with minimal downtime, often through techniques such as sharding and replication. They typically follow the BASE principles (basically available, soft state, eventual consistency) rather than strict ACID compliance, though some implementations support ACID transactions. These characteristics make them well-suited for big data, real-time applications, and distributed systems.
NoSQL databases are commonly classified into four primary categories based on their data models: document, key-value, wide-column (also known as column-family or column-oriented), and graph. Each category optimizes for specific access patterns and workloads.
Document databases store data as semi-structured documents, typically in formats resembling JSON, BSON, or XML, where each document contains fields that can vary across records. This model supports nested structures and hierarchical data, eliminating the need for joins in many cases and enabling efficient retrieval of related information. They excel in scenarios involving content management, user profiles, catalogs, and applications with evolving schemas. Representative examples include MongoDB and Couchbase.
Key-value databases represent the simplest NoSQL model, associating unique keys with arbitrary values that can range from simple strings to complex objects. They provide high-performance reads and writes, often in-memory, and are highly partitionable for massive scale. This category suits caching, session management, user preferences, and high-throughput applications such as gaming or IoT. Representative examples include Redis and Amazon DynamoDB.
Wide-column stores organize data into rows and dynamic columns, where each row can contain different columns, allowing sparse data representation and efficient compression. They optimize for analytical queries over large datasets and support high write throughput across distributed clusters. This model is effective for big data applications, time-series data, and scenarios requiring column-level access, such as recommendation systems or fraud detection. Representative examples include Apache Cassandra, Apache HBase, and Google Bigtable.
Graph databases represent data as nodes (entities) connected by edges (relationships), with properties attached to both, making them ideal for highly interconnected data where relationships are central. They enable efficient traversal of complex networks for queries involving social connections, recommendations, or fraud patterns. Representative examples include Neo4j and Amazon Neptune.
In many scenarios, NoSQL databases complement relational databases rather than replacing them, particularly when applications prioritize scalability, flexible data handling, or performance for specific workloads over complex transactional consistency.

Other specialized types

Beyond the relational and NoSQL categories, several specialized database types address distinct data characteristics and workload requirements.
Object-oriented databases store data as objects that encapsulate both attributes and behaviors, aligning closely with object-oriented programming paradigms. These databases represent information using classes, inheritance, polymorphism, and encapsulation, allowing complex data structures to be managed without the impedance mismatch often encountered when mapping application objects to relational tables. This design facilitates seamless integration with object-oriented languages and supports efficient handling of intricate relationships and hierarchies. They are particularly suited to applications involving complex data models, such as computer-aided design (CAD), multimedia systems, telecommunications networks, and scientific research domains like bioinformatics. Examples include systems like ObjectDB and GemStone/S.
Time-series databases are optimized for storing, retrieving, and analyzing time-stamped data points, such as metrics, sensor readings, events, and logs, where time is a primary dimension. They provide high ingestion throughput for sequential data streams, specialized compression tailored to timestamp patterns, lifecycle management for retention and downsampling, and efficient queries over time ranges or aggregations. These capabilities enable fast scans of large chronological datasets and support real-time monitoring alongside historical analysis. Common applications include infrastructure and application performance monitoring, Internet of Things (IoT) deployments, financial market tracking, energy grid management, and operational analytics. Prominent examples include InfluxDB, TimescaleDB, Prometheus, and TimescaleDB.
Other specialized types, such as spatial databases for geographic and location-based data, serve niche domains but are less commonly categorized separately from the primary paradigms.

Database models

Hierarchical and network models

The hierarchical and network models represent early navigational database approaches that dominated mainframe computing in the 1960s and 1970s, prior to the widespread adoption of relational systems. These models organize data using pointers and links for traversal, requiring applications to navigate predefined paths to access records.
The hierarchical model structures data in a tree-like format, with a single root node at the top and parent-child relationships extending downward. Each child record links to exactly one parent, supporting one-to-many associations, while parents can have multiple children. This rigid structure simplifies representation of nested or subordinate data, such as organizational charts or parts inventories, but limits flexibility for complex interconnections. Data access occurs by following hierarchical paths through pointers, making retrieval efficient for anticipated queries yet requiring code changes when relationships evolve. The most influential implementation was IBM's Information Management System (IMS), developed starting in the mid-1960s to track rocket parts and manage inventory for NASA's Apollo program. IMS, with its first operational message in 1968, combined a hierarchical database with high-volume transaction processing capabilities, becoming a commercial standard for applications like banking, airline reservations, and manufacturing.
The network model builds on hierarchical principles but introduces greater flexibility by permitting many-to-many relationships. Records (or sets) can connect to multiple parents, forming a graph-like structure rather than a strict tree. This allows more natural representation of real-world associations, such as students enrolled in multiple courses or parts supplied by multiple vendors. Like the hierarchical model, navigation relies on pointers between records, but the additional links enable more direct access paths. The model was formalized through the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL) Database Task Group, which published initial specifications in 1969 and a major update in 1971.
These navigational models provided reliable, high-performance data management for their era but required intricate programming to handle queries and schema changes. They were largely superseded by relational approaches, which offered greater data independence and ad-hoc query support.

Relational model

The relational model, introduced by Edgar F. Codd in 1970, represents data as relations, which are sets of tuples organized into tables where each row corresponds to a tuple and each column corresponds to an attribute drawn from a domain. Relations have properties including unordered rows, distinct rows, and ordered columns corresponding to domains, though users interact with domain-unordered relationships using role names to distinguish identical domains. This structure provides data independence by shielding users from internal storage representations.
A primary key is a domain or combination of domains whose values uniquely identify each tuple in the relation, and it is nonredundant when no component is superfluous. A foreign key is a domain or combination in one relation whose values match the primary key of another relation, enabling cross-referencing without embedding entity descriptions.
The relational model includes basic operations for manipulating relations. Projection selects specified columns from a relation and removes duplicate rows to produce a new relation. Selection (also called restriction) generates a subset of a relation by applying conditions or restricting it based on another relation, ensuring the result matches specified criteria. Join combines two relations on common domains, with the natural join preserving all information from both while matching values in the shared domain to form a new relation.
In 1985, Codd proposed twelve rules to define what constitutes a truly relational database management system. These rules are: (1) All information is represented explicitly in tables by values. (2) Every datum is accessible using table name, primary key, and column name. (3) Null values represent missing or inapplicable information systematically. (4) The database description is stored in the relational catalog at the logical level. (5) A comprehensive data sublanguage supports data definition, manipulation, integrity, authorization, and transactions. (6) All theoretically updatable views are updatable. (7) Insert, update, and delete operations apply to sets of rows, not just single rows. (8) Applications remain unchanged by changes in physical storage or access methods. (9) Applications remain unchanged by logical changes to base tables that preserve information. (10) Integrity constraints are defined in the sublanguage and stored in the catalog. (11) The data language handles distributed data without impacting applications. (12) Low-level record-at-a-time languages cannot subvert relational integrity constraints. These criteria have influenced the design of relational systems since their proposal.

Object-oriented and post-relational models

Object-oriented database models represent data as objects that encapsulate both attributes (data) and methods (behavior), directly aligning with object-oriented programming paradigms. Objects are instances of classes, which define shared structures and behaviors, while supporting core principles such as encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism. This approach enables a seamless mapping of application-level objects to persistent storage, eliminating much of the impedance mismatch encountered when using relational databases for complex domains.
Object-oriented databases emerged in the mid-1980s to address the shortcomings of relational models in managing complex, interrelated data structures found in applications such as computer-aided design, telecommunications, scientific simulations, and multimedia systems. They provide advantages in code reusability through inheritance, reduced maintenance costs, and more intuitive representation of real-world entities compared to flat tabular structures.
Post-relational models refer to database approaches that provide a more general data model than the traditional relational model or extend it beyond strict limitations, sometimes termed hybrid or object-enhanced RDBMS. Examples include object-relational databases (which add object features like user-defined types to relational systems), multivalue models (allowing multiple values per field), and graph models. These support more flexible data representation for complex or non-tabular structures.
In contrast, NewSQL databases are a class of modern relational systems that combine ACID compliance, strong consistency, and SQL querying with horizontal scalability and distributed architectures for high-throughput OLTP workloads. They address scalability limitations of traditional relational databases while preserving transactional integrity. Representative systems include CockroachDB (strongly consistent distributed SQL) and Google Spanner (globally distributed transactions with high availability).

Database management systems

Core components and architecture

The core components of a database management system (DBMS) primarily include the query processor and storage manager (also known as the storage engine), which work together to handle data access, consistency, and protection. These components interact in a layered architecture that separates concerns for efficiency and reliability, with the query processor handling high-level operations and the storage manager managing lower-level persistence. Transaction management and security/authorization are integrated functions within these components.
The query processor is responsible for parsing, validating, optimizing, and coordinating the execution of user queries (typically in SQL or similar languages). It includes subcomponents such as the parser (which checks syntax and semantics), optimizer (which generates efficient execution plans based on statistics and cost models), and executor (which orchestrates dataflow through operators). The query processor relies on metadata from the system catalog, interacts with the storage manager to retrieve or update data, and enforces authorization checks during parsing and execution.
The storage manager manages the physical organization and access of data on disk or other persistent media. It includes access methods (such as heaps or B+-trees for indexing), buffer management (which caches pages in memory to minimize I/O), and file allocation. The storage manager ensures efficient data retrieval and updates, often using shared buffer pools, and incorporates transaction management functions to maintain consistency during modifications. It also includes subcomponents like the transaction manager (enforcing ACID properties through locking and write-ahead logging) and authorization manager (for access control).
Transaction management enforces the ACID properties (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) through mechanisms such as locking (via a lock manager) and recovery via write-ahead logging (WAL), where changes are logged before application to data pages. These functions are typically integrated within the storage manager and interact with the query processor to track transaction state and ensure atomic updates and crash recovery.
Authorization and security functions enforce access control and data protection, primarily integrated into the query processor (validating privileges during query parsing and execution) and storage manager (via authorization metadata in the catalog). These checks occur at connection time for credentials and during operations for privileges such as SELECT or UPDATE, often including row-level enforcement where supported.
DBMS architectures commonly adopt a client-server model, where clients connect to a database server via protocols like ODBC or JDBC (two-tier), or through intermediate application servers (multi-tier) for added scalability and security. In contrast, embedded architectures integrate the DBMS directly into applications, with no separate server process, offering simplicity for single-user or lightweight scenarios. Many modern DBMSs separate logical and physical data representations to achieve data independence, allowing changes to storage structures without affecting application views.

Essential functions

A database management system (DBMS) provides essential functions to define, manipulate, and control data within a database, while ensuring reliable multi-user access through concurrency control, recovery mechanisms, and authorization. These functions enable efficient management of structured data across applications and users.
Data definition allows the creation and modification of database structures, including schemas, tables, indexes, views, and constraints. This is typically achieved through a Data Definition Language (DDL), such as SQL commands like CREATE, ALTER, and DROP, which define the logical organization of data and enforce integrity rules such as primary keys and foreign keys. The DBMS maintains a metadata catalog (also known as the system catalog or data dictionary) that stores details about these structures for reference and validation.
Data manipulation involves operations to insert, update, delete, and retrieve data. A Data Manipulation Language (DML), commonly SQL commands such as INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, and SELECT, enables users and applications to modify and query database content while preserving consistency. The DBMS optimizes these operations through its storage engine and query processor to handle efficient data access.
Data control governs access and privileges through a Data Control Language (DCL), such as GRANT and REVOKE commands in SQL, which specify what operations authorized users can perform on specific objects. This function, combined with authorization mechanisms, ensures that permissions are assigned based on roles or users, restricting unauthorized actions.
Concurrency control coordinates simultaneous access by multiple users or applications to prevent data inconsistencies or corruption. The DBMS employs techniques like locking (via a lock manager) to manage concurrent transactions, ensuring that operations do not interfere destructively. This function supports reliable multi-user environments and underpins ACID compliance by maintaining isolation and consistency during concurrent operations.
Recovery mechanisms protect data integrity after failures such as hardware crashes or software errors. The DBMS uses logging (via a log manager) to record changes, enabling rollback of incomplete transactions and restoration to a consistent state. Backup utilities support full, incremental, or differential backups, while recovery tools allow restoration with minimal data loss.

Database languages

SQL

Structured Query Language (SQL) is a standardized programming language designed for managing and querying data in relational database management systems (RDBMS). It allows users to create, retrieve, update, delete, and control access to structured data organized in tables with rows and columns linked by keys. SQL is declarative, specifying desired results rather than procedural steps, making it accessible for data operations across systems like IBM Db2, PostgreSQL, Oracle Database, and Microsoft SQL Server.
SQL was originally developed in the 1970s by IBM researchers and standardized by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1986 and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1987, with the current version being ISO/IEC 9075. These ANSI/ISO standards define core syntax and commands to promote compatibility across database platforms, though vendors add proprietary extensions (such as T-SQL or PL/SQL) while maintaining compliance with core elements.
SQL commands are categorized into several groups, including Data Definition Language (DDL), Data Manipulation Language (DML), Data Control Language (DCL), and Transaction Control Language (TCL). DDL manages database structures and objects such as tables, views, and indexes, using commands like CREATE, ALTER, DROP, and TRUNCATE. For example:
CREATE TABLE products (
 product_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
 name VARCHAR(100),
 price DECIMAL(10, 2)
);

DML handles data content within those structures through commands such as INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE. Examples include:
INSERT INTO customers (name, email, city)
VALUES ('Jane Doe', '', 'Los Angeles');
UPDATE customers
SET email = ''
WHERE name = 'John Doe';

DCL governs access and permissions with commands like GRANT and REVOKE, enabling administrators to control user privileges on database objects.
TCL manages transactions to ensure data consistency, using commands such as COMMIT, ROLLBACK, and SAVEPOINT to confirm or undo changes made by DML operations.
The primary querying mechanism in SQL is the SELECT statement, which retrieves data from one or more tables, often combined with clauses like WHERE for filtering, ORDER BY for sorting, GROUP BY for grouping, and HAVING for filtering aggregated results. SELECT supports combining data across tables via JOIN operations, which link rows based on related columns. Common join types include INNER JOIN (matching rows only), LEFT JOIN (all rows from the left table), RIGHT JOIN, and FULL JOIN. For example:
SELECT c.name, p.name AS product_name
FROM customers c
JOIN orders o ON c.customer_id = o.customer_id
JOIN products p ON o.product_id = p.product_id
WHERE c.city = 'New York';

Subqueries (nested queries) return data used by an outer query, appearing in clauses such as WHERE, SELECT, FROM, or HAVING. Types include single-value subqueries (returning one value, often with aggregates), list subqueries (using IN/NOT IN), and existence subqueries (using EXISTS/NOT EXISTS). For example:
SELECT name
FROM customers
WHERE customer_id IN (SELECT customer_id FROM orders WHERE product_id = 1);
Many subqueries can be equivalently expressed as joins, though performance may vary by context.
Aggregation applies functions like COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, and MAX to compute summaries over data sets, typically with GROUP BY to partition results. For example:
SELECT city, COUNT(*)
FROM customers
GROUP BY city;
These features enable efficient querying, data combination, and analysis while adhering to SQL's standardized foundation.

Non-SQL query languages

Non-SQL query languages are diverse tools used primarily in non-relational databases to query and manipulate data, tailored to specific data models such as document, graph, key-value, or columnar stores. Unlike SQL, which is standardized for relational databases, these languages vary widely in syntax, expressiveness, and paradigm, reflecting the flexibility and specialization of NoSQL systems.
A fundamental distinction among query languages is between declarative and imperative styles. Declarative languages specify what data is desired, leaving the how of executionsuch as traversal paths or optimizationto the database engine, enabling better optimization and often simpler queries. Imperative languages specify how to perform the query through explicit step-by-step instructions, offering fine-grained control but requiring deeper knowledge of the underlying implementation and increasing the risk of errors.
Many non-SQL query languages adopt a declarative approach. For document-oriented databases, MongoDB employs the MongoDB Query Language (MQL), which uses JSON-like syntax to filter, project, and aggregate nested documents directly, avoiding the need for joins common in relational systems. For graph databases, Neo4j's Cypher is a declarative language focused on pattern matching over nodes and relationships, allowing concise expressions of complex traversals. Apache TinkerPop's Gremlin supports graph traversal with both declarative and imperative features, enabling procedural control when needed.
In contrast, key-value stores typically rely on imperative APIs rather than full query languages. Systems like Amazon DynamoDB or Redis use simple operations such as get(key), put(key, value), or set key value to access or update data by key, providing low-level, procedural interaction suited to high-speed lookups.
Other examples include SPARQL for RDF-based graph data, which is declarative and focuses on triple patterns, and specialized languages like AQL in multi-model systems such as ArangoDB. These alternatives highlight the adaptation of query paradigms to non-tabular data structures, prioritizing performance, scalability, or expressiveness for specific use cases.

Storage and implementation

Physical storage structures

In database systems, data is persistently stored on secondary storage devices, such as hard disks or solid-state drives. The fundamental unit of storage and data transfer between disk and main memory is a fixed-size block or page, typically ranging from a few kilobytes (e.g., 4 KB to 16 KB) depending on the system.
Database files are organized as collections of these pages, managed by the DBMS storage manager, which handles allocation, free space tracking, and mapping of logical page identifiers to physical disk locations. Pages may contain tuples (records), metadata, or index entries, often using a slotted page layout where a header and slot array track record locations and free space to support variable-length records.
A common physical organization is the heap file, in which records are stored in no particular order, typically appended to available space in pages or inserted into free slots within existing pages. Heap files support fast insertions but require full scans or auxiliary structures for efficient retrieval, as records have no inherent ordering.
Other file organizations include sequential files, where records are maintained in sorted order based on a key, and hash-based files, where a hash function determines the target page or bucket for each record to enable direct access via equality lookups.
To enable fast access without scanning entire files, databases use indexing structures that map key values to record locations. Common structures include B-trees (often B+ trees), which maintain sorted keys in a balanced tree for efficient equality and range queries, and hash indexes, which apply a hash function to distribute keys and provide constant-time average-case lookups for equality conditions. Indexes are stored separately or integrated with the data and reference records via physical pointers (such as page identifiers and slot numbers).

Advanced features (replication, materialized views)

Advanced features in database storage and implementation include replication and materialized views, which address challenges in availability, scalability, fault tolerance, and query performance.
Database replication maintains multiple copies of data across servers to enhance high availability and scalability. It ensures continued operation if a server fails, as replicas can serve requests, and distributes read workloads to improve throughput. Replication supports fault tolerance and disaster recovery by providing redundant copies, reducing downtime and data loss risks. Common models include master-slave replication, where a primary server handles writes and propagates changes to secondary servers, and multi-master replication, allowing writes across nodes with mechanisms for conflict resolution. Synchronous replication commits transactions only after updates propagate to replicas, ensuring strong consistency at the cost of potential latency, while asynchronous replication prioritizes performance but may introduce temporary inconsistencies.
Materialized views store precomputed query results as physical tables to accelerate access for complex or repeated queries. Unlike standard views, which compute results dynamically from source tables, materialized views hold data directly, reducing execution time for joins, aggregations, or transformations. They improve performance in reporting, dashboards, or analytical workloads by eliminating repeated computations and enabling indexing on the stored data. Maintenance involves refreshing the vieweither fully, incrementally, or on-demandwhen underlying data changes, trading some overhead for faster queries. This approach suits scenarios where source data is not optimally formatted or where queries are resource-intensive.

Transactions and concurrency

ACID properties

ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) refers to a set of four key properties that database transactions must satisfy to ensure reliable processing, particularly in the presence of errors, system failures, or concurrent operations. These properties guarantee that database operations maintain data integrity and validity even under challenging conditions.
Atomicity ensures that a transaction is treated as an indivisible unit: either all operations within the transaction are successfully completed and applied, or none are applied at all. If any part of the transaction fails, the entire transaction is rolled back, leaving the database unchanged. This "all-or-nothing" property prevents partial updates that could leave the system in an inconsistent state. For example, in a bank fund transfer, both the debit from one account and the credit to another must occur together, or neither occurs.
Consistency guarantees that a transaction brings the database from one valid state to another valid state, preserving all predefined rules, constraints, triggers, and data integrity requirements. The transaction must adhere to the database's integrity constraints, ensuring that only legal changes are applied. In the bank transfer example, consistency ensures that the total sum of funds across accounts remains unchanged before and after the transaction.
Isolation ensures that concurrent transactions do not interfere with each other. Each transaction executes as if it were the only one running, even when multiple transactions occur simultaneously. Intermediate states of a transaction are not visible to others, making concurrent transactions appear to execute serially. In the fund transfer scenario, another transaction would see funds either fully in the source account or fully in the destination account, but never in an intermediate state.
Durability guarantees that once a transaction is committed, its changes are permanently saved and survive subsequent system failures, such as crashes or power outages. Committed data is persisted to non-volatile storage, typically using techniques like write-ahead logging, so that changes are recoverable upon restart. In the transfer example, once committed, the updated account balances persist even if the system fails immediately afterward.
These properties, pioneered by Jim Gray in his foundational work on transaction processing and later formalized as the ACID acronym, collectively ensure that database transactions remain reliable, protecting against data corruption and loss in mission-critical applications.

Concurrency control mechanisms

Concurrency control mechanisms enable multiple transactions to access shared data simultaneously while preserving consistency and preventing interference that could violate isolation guarantees.
The primary approaches are pessimistic concurrency control, which assumes conflicts are likely and prevents them proactively, and optimistic concurrency control, which assumes conflicts are rare and detects them reactively. Pessimistic concurrency control relies on locking: transactions acquire locks on data items before accessing them. Shared locks (read locks) allow multiple transactions to read but not modify the data, while exclusive locks (write locks) grant sole access for modification. Two-phase locking (2PL) is a common protocol, requiring transactions to acquire all locks before releasing any (growing phase followed by shrinking phase), ensuring serializable schedules. Strict 2PL, a variant, holds all locks until commit or abort, preventing cascading aborts.
Multi-version concurrency control (MVCC), often used in optimistic approaches, maintains multiple versions of data items. Each transaction reads from a consistent snapshot based on its start time or a global timestamp, avoiding many read-write conflicts. Writers create new versions without blocking readers, who access prior committed versions. This enhances concurrency in read-heavy workloads, though writers may still use locking or validation. Databases like PostgreSQL implement MVCC to support isolation levels with minimal blocking, using snapshots for consistency and predicate locking in stricter modes to detect dependencies without blocking.
Isolation levels define the trade-off between concurrency and protection against anomalies like dirty reads (reading uncommitted data), non-repeatable reads (re-reading changed committed data), and phantom reads (seeing new rows from concurrent inserts). The ANSI/ISO SQL standard defines four levels:

Read Uncommitted: Allows dirty reads; no anomalies are prevented.

Read Committed: Prevents dirty reads but allows non-repeatable reads and phantom reads.

Repeatable Read: Prevents dirty reads and non-repeatable reads but allows phantom reads in the standard (though some implementations like PostgreSQL prevent them via MVCC).

Serializable: Prevents all three anomalies and serialization anomalies, ensuring equivalent serial execution.

Higher levels provide stronger guarantees but may reduce concurrency.
In locking-based systems, deadlocks can occur when transactions form a cycle of waiting for each other's locks. Databases detect deadlocks using a wait-for graph, where nodes represent transactions and edges indicate wait dependencies. A cycle signals a deadlock. Detection often runs via a lock monitor thread (e.g., periodically in SQL Server). Resolution selects a victim transactiontypically the least costly to roll back or based on priorityand aborts it, releasing its locks and raising an error for retry.

Security

Access control and authentication

Access control in databases consists of authentication and authorization mechanisms to regulate who can connect to the system and what operations they may perform. Authentication verifies the identity of a user attempting to access the database, while authorization determines the specific privileges granted to that user after successful authentication.
Common authentication methods include username and password combinations, where the database management system verifies credentials against stored values. More advanced approaches integrate with external directory services, such as Active Directory for Windows environments or LDAP for cross-platform centralized management. Single sign-on (SSO) protocols, such as SAML or OpenID Connect, enable users to authenticate once across multiple systems, reducing credential management overhead. Many modern databases support or recommend multi-factor authentication (MFA), requiring additional verification factors like one-time codes or biometrics to strengthen security against credential compromise.
Authorization in databases is most commonly implemented through role-based access control (RBAC), where privileges are assigned to roles rather than directly to individual users, and users are then assigned to those roles. This approach simplifies management by allowing privilege inheritance through role hierarchies and supports scalable administration in large environments. Some systems also incorporate discretionary access control (DAC), in which the owner of an object can grant or revoke access to it.
In relational databases adhering to SQL standards, authorization is managed using the GRANT and REVOKE statements. The GRANT command assigns specific privilegessuch as SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETEon securable objects like tables, views, or schemas to users or roles. For example, GRANT SELECT ON table TO user allows the specified user to read from that table, while WITH GRANT OPTION permits the grantee to further delegate the privilege. The REVOKE statement removes previously granted privileges, such as REVOKE SELECT ON table FROM user, ensuring fine-grained control over access. Privileges can be managed at various scopes, and in many implementations, only object owners or users with elevated privileges (such as those holding CONTROL or MANAGE GRANTS) can execute these commands.

Encryption and protection measures

Databases employ multiple layers of protection to safeguard sensitive data against unauthorized access, breaches, and misuse, complementing access control mechanisms by focusing on encryption, masking, auditing, and network-level defenses.
Encryption protects data at rest by converting stored database files and logs into an unreadable format that requires decryption keys for access, rendering the data unusable if storage media is compromised or stolen. Techniques such as Transparent Data Encryption (TDE) encrypt entire database files at the storage level with minimal performance overhead, while column-level encryption targets specific sensitive columns using symmetric keys.
Encryption in transit secures data during transmission between clients and the database server using protocols like Transport Layer Security (TLS), ensuring that intercepted communications remain confidential and tamper-resistant. This typically requires TLS 1.2 or higher for connections, preventing eavesdropping or man-in-the-middle attacks over networks.
Data masking obscures sensitive information without altering the underlying data structure, enabling safe use in non-production environments such as testing or development. Techniques include substitution, redaction, or dynamic masking that hides data from non-privileged users during queries, reducing exposure risks while maintaining functional usability of datasets.
Auditing monitors and logs database activities, including user actions, queries, and access attempts, to detect anomalies, support compliance, and enable forensic analysis. Audit logs capture events in real time or are stored centrally for review, with configurable policies for alerting on suspicious behavior such as unauthorized modifications.
Database firewalls filter and monitor traffic to the database, blocking malicious SQL statements like injection attempts and enforcing policies on allowed queries or connections. These firewalls operate at the network or application layer, inspecting SQL traffic in real time to prevent exploits and unauthorized commands while logging violations for further investigation.

Design and modeling

Data modeling approaches

Data modeling approaches provide structured methodologies for representing the structure, relationships, and constraints of data during the conceptual and logical design phases of database development. These approaches help translate real-world requirements into organized data structures while promoting data integrity, minimizing redundancy, and facilitating future modifications.
The Entity-Relationship (ER) model, introduced by Peter Chen in 1976, is a foundational conceptual data modeling technique. It represents real-world objects as entities, their properties as attributes, and associations among them as relationships, incorporating semantic information to create a unified view of data independent of implementation details. This model supports high-level design by capturing key semantic aspects of the domain, making it widely used for initial database conceptualization.
The Unified Modeling Language (UML), particularly through extensions to class diagrams, offers another approach for data modeling, often applied to relational databases. In UML data modeling profiles, classes represent tables, attributes represent columns, and stereotypes such as <>, <> (primary key), <> (foreign key), and <> (alternate key) denote specific database elements. Associations capture relationships between tables, with multiplicity indicating cardinality (e.g., 1..* or 0..1), and additional constructs support indices, views, and constraints. This standardized notation bridges software and data design.
Normalization serves as a systematic technique for organizing data in relational databases to eliminate redundancy and prevent insertion, update, and deletion anomalies. Introduced by Edgar F. Codd in his 1970 relational model, normalization begins by ensuring relations have only simple (atomic) domains, achieving first normal form (1NF) and eliminating nonsimple or repeating groups. The process decomposes unnormalized structures into normalized relations while preserving dependencies through primary and foreign keys.
Subsequent refinements defined higher normal forms to address more complex dependencies:

Second normal form (2NF) builds on 1NF by removing partial dependencies, where non-key attributes depend on only part of a composite primary key.

Third normal form (3NF) eliminates transitive dependencies, ensuring non-key attributes depend only on the primary key.

Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF) strengthens 3NF by requiring that every determinant (attribute on which another depends) is a candidate key.

Fourth normal form (4NF) resolves multivalued dependencies, preventing independent multiple associations in a relation.

Fifth normal form (5NF) addresses join dependencies, ensuring lossless decomposition and no spurious tuples after joins.

These progressive normal forms guide designers toward optimal relational structures, balancing integrity with performance considerations.

Schema views (external, conceptual, internal)

The ANSI/SPARC three-schema architecture (also known as the ANSI/X3/SPARC three-level architecture) organizes the description of a database into three levels of abstraction: the external level, the conceptual level, and the internal level. Proposed in 1975 by the ANSI/X3/SPARC committee, this framework separates user perspectives from the logical organization and physical storage of data, enabling greater flexibility and maintainability in database systems.
The external level (or external schema) defines how individual users or applications perceive the database. It consists of multiple customized views that include only the data relevant to a specific user group, along with their permitted operations and presentation format. These views hide irrelevant portions of the database and can vary significantly across users; for example, one user might see a combined "name" field while another sees separate "first name" and "last name" fields. Each external schema is derived from the conceptual schema through mappings that ensure user-specific abstractions remain consistent with the overall database structure.
The conceptual level (or conceptual schema) provides a single, unified logical view of the entire database, independent of physical storage details or individual user perspectives. It describes all entities, attributes, relationships, integrity constraints, security rules, and semantic information that collectively represent the organization's complete data requirements. This level serves as an intermediary, bridging external views and physical implementation, and remains stable even when physical storage changes.
The internal level (or internal schema) specifies the physical representation of the database on storage media. It includes details such as file organization, indexing methods, storage allocation, compression techniques, encryption, and access paths that optimize performance and interact directly with the operating system and hardware. This level focuses on efficient data storage and retrieval without exposing those implementation choices to higher levels.
The primary benefit of this architecture is data independence, which insulates higher levels from changes at lower levels through mappings between schemas. Physical data independence allows modifications to the internal schemasuch as changing storage structures or hardwarewithout affecting the conceptual or external schemas. Logical data independence permits changes to the conceptual schemasuch as adding entities or relationshipswithout requiring alterations to existing external schemas or user applications. This separation reduces maintenance effort, enhances scalability, and supports evolving database requirements without widespread disruption.

Additional topics

Backup, recovery, and migration

Backup and recovery are essential mechanisms to protect database integrity and availability against hardware failures, software errors, human mistakes, corruption, and disasters. Backups create restorable copies of data, while recovery processes use these copies to return the database to a consistent state. Best practices include storing backups on separate media from the primary database files, regularly testing restores for reliability, scheduling backups during low-activity periods, and documenting procedures for consistent execution.
Common backup strategies include full backups, which capture the complete database state at a given time; differential backups, which record only changes since the last full backup; and transaction log backups, which capture incremental changes recorded in the log since the previous log backup. These strategies balance storage requirements, backup speed, and recovery time, with full backups providing a complete baseline and others reducing resource usage for frequent operations.
Point-in-time recovery (PITR) enables restoration to a precise moment, offering fine-grained protection against partial data loss or errors. It typically requires support for transaction log backups, where recovery begins with a full or differential backup followed by applying log records forward up to the desired timestamp. This process replays committed transactions from the logs while rolling back incomplete ones, minimizing data loss compared to restoring only to the last full backup.
Database migration transfers data, schema, and associated objects from one system to another, often driven by platform upgrades, cloud adoption, performance needs, or consolidation. Migration techniques include big bang migration, a single, time-boxed transfer requiring scheduled downtime; trickle migration, a phased approach that divides the process into smaller, verifiable stages; and zero-downtime migration, which synchronizes data continuously to allow ongoing operations on the source system during the transfer. Each strategy trades off between simplicity, risk, and availability, with zero-downtime approaches often relying on replication mechanisms for real-time consistency.
Successful migration requires careful planning, including defining project scope, analyzing data compatibility and volume, identifying unnecessary data to exclude, and ensuring clear communication across teams to assign responsibilities and validate outcomes. Testing migration processes in advance and monitoring progress minimize risks such as data inconsistency or extended downtime.

Performance tuning and maintenance

Database performance tuning and maintenance involve ongoing activities to optimize query execution, resource usage, and system efficiency while ensuring long-term reliability. These tasks focus on reducing latency, improving throughput, and managing resources effectively as data volumes grow and workloads evolve. Effective tuning relies on understanding query patterns, data distribution, and physical implementation details.
Query optimization is central to performance, where the database system selects the most efficient execution plan from many semantically equivalent alternatives. Modern relational database optimizers use cost-based approaches, estimating plan costs based on statistics such as table sizes, index structures, and data selectivity to choose low-cost plans involving operations like joins, scans, and sorts. Foundational techniques include dynamic programming to explore join orders and algebraic transformations to restructure queries, as established in early systems like System R and extended in later frameworks. Cost estimation depends on accurate statistics and models accounting for I/O, CPU, and buffer effects.
Indexing strategies significantly influence query performance by reducing the need for full table scans. Clustered indexes physically organize data in sorted order by key values, accelerating range queries and joins, while non-clustered (secondary) indexes provide pointers to data locations, offering flexibility for multiple access paths but requiring additional lookups. Composite indexes support queries involving multiple columns, and covering indexes can satisfy queries entirely from the index structure, minimizing data access. Effective strategies include creating indexes on frequently filtered or joined columns, avoiding over-indexing to prevent maintenance overhead, and monitoring index usage to remove redundant ones. Regular maintenance, such as rebuilding fragmented indexes, ensures sustained performance.
Database statistics provide essential summaries of data distribution, such as cardinality estimates and histograms, enabling the query optimizer to generate accurate cost estimates. Outdated or inaccurate statistics can lead to suboptimal plans, so maintenance involves periodically updating them through tasks like analyzing tables or partitions. For large partitioned tables, incremental statistics collection computes global statistics efficiently by aggregating synopses from changed partitions rather than rescanning the entire table, reducing maintenance time and resource consumption.
Partitioning divides large tables into smaller, manageable segments based on criteria like range, list, or hash, improving performance by enabling partition pruning, where queries scan only relevant partitions. This reduces I/O and query execution time, particularly for time-series or historical data. Partitioning also simplifies maintenance, allowing targeted operations such as rebuilding, optimizing, or analyzing individual partitions without affecting the entire table. Regular partition maintenance tasks include checking integrity, reclaiming space after deletions, and reorganizing to reduce fragmentation.
Routine maintenance tasks encompass monitoring performance metrics, updating statistics, reorganizing indexes, and applying optimizations to address fragmentation or changing workloads. Tools such as dynamic management views help identify bottlenecks, while automated processes ensure statistics freshness and index health. These activities maintain consistent performance and prevent degradation over time.

Emerging trends and research

Recent developments in database research emphasize the integration of artificial intelligence, the evolution of multi-model architectures, advancements in cloud-native designs, and efforts to enhance privacy and long-term security.
A major focus is AI integration, particularly through the addition of vector capabilities to support embeddings for generative AI applications. Mainstream databases such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB, and others have incorporated vector data types and similarity search functions to enable efficient retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and semantic querying. This allows storage and fast retrieval of numerical representations for unstructured data like documents, images, and audio. Natural language-to-SQL interfaces have also become widespread, with tools facilitating query generation and code completion. Research continues on AI-driven automation, including self-driving databases that use machine learning for tuning, security, backups, and anomaly detection, as well as augmented systems for data quality and governance.
Multi-model databases represent another key direction, supporting multiple data modelssuch as document, graph, key-value, and relationalwithin a single system. This approach reduces architectural complexity compared to polyglot persistence and lowers costs through unified querying and storage. Examples include Microsoft Azure Cosmos DB, ArangoDB, and Couchbase, which combine various models while maintaining ACID properties and scalability. Such designs align with cloud-native environments, enabling distributed systems and microservices.
Cloud-native databases continue to advance with serverless models, auto-scaling, and convergence of operational and analytical workloads. Open table formats like Delta Lake and Apache Iceberg support shared data access and high-performance management in cloud ecosystems.
Research in privacy-preserving databases explores techniques like differential privacy and homomorphic encryption to enable analysis while limiting individual data exposure. These efforts address challenges in cloud and shared environments, with ongoing work on privacy-preserving query processing and synthetic data generation.
In security research, post-quantum cryptography (PQC) is gaining attention to protect against future quantum threats. As of 2025-2026, adoption remains emerging and in progress following NIST standardization of algorithms such as ML-KEM (formerly CRYSTALS-Kyber) and ML-DSA (formerly CRYSTALS-Dilithium). Some databases and cloud providers are incorporating or exploring PQC support, including PostgreSQL via extensions, Microsoft Azure SQL Database through quantum-resistant solutions, and Google Cloud SQL via post-quantum TLS protocols and Cloud KMS integration for key management. These efforts aim to provide quantum-resistant key exchange, signatures, and encryption of data at rest and in transit, addressing risks such as "harvest now, decrypt later."

References

What Is a Database? | Oracle

What is a Database? - Cloud Databases Explained

What is a Database? | IBM

What Is a NoSQL Database? | IBM

https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/dbms/difference-between-file-system-and-dbms/

https://365datascience.com/tutorials/sql-tutorials/database-vs-spreadsheet/

Characteristics of the Database Approach - GeeksforGeeks

https://eng.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Computer_Science/Databases_and_Data_Structures/Database_Design_2e_(Watt

Chapter 3 Characteristics and Benefits of a Database

ACID Properties in DBMS - GeeksforGeeks

What Is a Database?

https://aws.amazon.com/what-is-database/

https://aws.amazon.com/what-is-database

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

https://library.si.edu/research/databases-science-research

https://data.gov/

CS262a: System R & DBMS Overview

Fifty Years of Databases

A Brief History of Database Management - Dataversity

Information Management Systems

The relational database

Important Papers: Codd and the Relational Model

A Very Brief History of the Relational Model - by Joe Reis

30 Years Ago: The Rise, Fall and Survival of Ashton-Tate's dBASE

Microsoft Access Versions | Access Training Courses - ZandaX

Of Objects and Databases: A Decade of Turmoil - cs.wisc.edu

Thirty years (and more) of databases

A brief history of databases: From relational, to NoSQL, to distributed ...

What Is NoSQL? NoSQL Databases Explained

A history and timeline of big data

What's Really New with NewSQL?

NewSQL

What is a Relational Database?

What Is a Relational Database | Oracle

What is a Relational Database (RDBMS)?

What is SQL? - Structured Query Language (SQL) Explained

What is a NoSQL Database?

What is NoSQL? Databases Explained

What Is An Object-Oriented Database?

Four Database Types You Need to Know | Splunk

Time series database explained

Understanding 11 Types of Databases: A Comprehensive ...

What is a Hierarchical Database?

A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks

Basic Object Oriented Data Model - GeeksforGeeks

Achievements and Weaknesses of Object-Oriented ...

NewSQL: Everything You Need to Know

What is NewSQL?

Architecture of a Database System

Structure of Database Management System - GeeksforGeeks

What is a Database Management System (DBMS)? | Definition from TechTarget

What is a Database Management System (DBMS)?

What is a Database Management System (DBMS)? ...

What Is Structured Query Language (SQL)?

Subqueries (SQL Server) - SQL Server | Microsoft Learn

Imperative vs. Declarative Query Languages: Definition & Examples

https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/nosql-databases/

Database Storage: Files & Pages

Chapter 13: Data Storage Structures

6. Storage and File Structures

File Organization in DBMS - GeeksforGeeks

Indexing in Databases - GeeksforGeeks

Database Replication in System Design - GeeksforGeeks

What Is Data Replication? | IBM

What is a Materialized View?

Materialized View pattern - Azure Architecture Center

Jim Gray Additional Materials - A.M. Turing Award Winner

ACID properties of transactions

What are Acid Transactions?

Concurrency Control in Database Management Systems (DBMS) | Aerospike

Documentation: 18: 13.2. Transaction Isolation

Transaction Isolation Levels in DBMS - GeeksforGeeks

Deadlocks Guide - SQL Server | Microsoft Learn

Access Control 101: A Comprehensive Guide to Database ...

Database Authentication

Overview of Access Control

GRANT (Transact-SQL) - SQL Server | Microsoft Learn

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/t-sql/statements/revoke-database-principal-permissions-transact-sql?view=sql-server-ver17

Azure database security checklist | Microsoft Learn

What Is Database Security?

Effective Database Security Solutions

Database Security: An Essential Guide

The entity-relationship modeltoward a unified view of data

The Entity-Relationship Model-Toward a Unified View of Data

UML Data Model Profile: A Practical Notation

The Three-Level ANSI-SPARC Architecture - GeeksforGeeks

ANSI/X3/SPARC Three Schema Architecture

Three Level Architecture of Database

Back up and Restore of SQL Server Databases - SQL Server | Microsoft Learn

9.5 Point-in-Time (Incremental) Recovery

Database Backups 101: What is Point in Time Recovery? | Severalnines

An Introduction to Database Migration Strategy and Best ...

An Overview of Query Optimization in Relational Systems

Efficient Statistics Maintenance for Partitioned Tables Using Incremental Statistics Part 1 | optimizer

26.3.4 Maintenance of Partitions

Monitor and Tune for Performance - SQL Server | Microsoft Learn

Database Trends: A 2024 Review and a Look Ahead - The New Stack

Database Management Trends in 2024 - Dataversity

The Rise of Multi-Model Databases in Modern Architectures: Innovation, Market Impact, and Organizational ReadinessThe Rise of Multi-Model Databases in Modern Architectures: Innovation, Market Impact, and Organizational Readiness These SEO elements are optimized to attract your target audience of CTOs, DevOps professionals, and database administrators while focusing on the key technical and business benefits of multi-model databases. The meta title and description are crafted to encourage clicks from search results by highlighting the practical value readers will gain from your article.

Maximizing data utility while preserving privacy through ...

PATHE: A Privacy-Preserving Database Pattern Search ...

Quantum-Resistant Encryption in Modern Databases

Post-quantum cryptography (PQC)
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion