Dead code Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Dead code
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Dead code refers to portions of a program's source code that cannot be executed due to control flow impossibilities. It can also include ineffective code, such as computations assigning values to variables that are never read or used elsewhere. In standards like MISRA C, unreachable code cannot be executed at all, while dead code can be reached but alters no functional outcomes. Note that definitions of dead code vary, with some sources limiting it to unreachable code and others encompassing code with no observable effect.
Dead code often arises from incomplete refactoring, deprecated features, conditional compilations that exclude paths, or evolving requirements in large software projects. It is prevalent in both open-source and commercial systems, contributing to codebase bloat and complicating analysis. Compiler optimizations, such as dead code elimination, systematically remove these sections during compilation by analyzing data flow and live variable usage, thereby reducing executable size and improving performance without changing program semantics.
The presence of dead code degrades software quality by increasing maintenance efforts, as developers must navigate irrelevant sections that obscure intent and raise false positives in tools like static analyzers. In safety-critical domains, it violates guidelines prohibiting unreachable or ineffective code to ensure predictability and verifiability. Detection typically involves static analysis techniques, including control-flow graphs and dependency tracking, though challenges persist with dynamic languages or obfuscated code. Eliminating dead code not only streamlines development but also mitigates subtle risks, such as overlooked side effects in seemingly inert sections.

Overview

Definition

Dead code refers to portions of source code that either cannot be executed due to control flow impossibilities or, if executed, produce results that have no impact on the program's observable behavior or output. This includes unreachable statements positioned after unconditional jumps, such as a return or exit directive, or code within conditional branches that are provably never taken based on static analysis of the program's control flow. The non-execution or ineffectiveness of such code is determined through analysis of the program's control flow and data dependencies.
Dead code manifests in various forms, including individual statements, entire functions, unused variables, or even complete modules that are never invoked or whose results are not used during program execution. Its key characteristic is the provability of non-execution or lack of impact, distinguishing it from potentially executable but inefficient code; this provability relies on static properties of the control flow graph and data flow rather than runtime behavior.
It is important to distinguish dead code from related concepts, such as obsolete code, which remains executable but is deprecated and no longer serves the intended functionality. Similarly, commented-out code is intentionally disabled by developers and thus excluded from compilation or interpretation, rendering it not inherently dead as it is no longer treated as active source code. Unreachable code forms a subset of dead code specifically tied to control flow impossibilities, while unused code refers to computations that are executed but whose results are never read or affect the program's output.
Dead code is frequently targeted by compiler optimizations, where it is automatically removed to improve program efficiency without altering semantics.

Significance

Dead code imposes significant performance overhead in software systems by increasing binary size, extending compilation times, and potentially introducing inefficiencies during runtime execution. For instance, unused code segments contribute to larger executables, which can elevate memory usage and slow down loading processes, particularly in resource-constrained environments like mobile or embedded applications. Compilers may partially mitigate this through dead code elimination optimizations, but residual dead code still prolongs build processes, as seen in analyses of large-scale projects where excessive unused portions inflate compilation durations by notable margins. Additionally, dead code can harbor unused execution paths that, if inadvertently activated, lead to unforeseen performance degradation or even system failures.
Beyond performance, dead code exacerbates maintenance challenges by bloating the codebase, thereby confusing developers and elevating technical debt. In mature projects, this clutter obscures critical logic, making refactoring and debugging more arduous as teams must navigate irrelevant sections, which slows feature development and heightens the risk of introducing new bugs. Studies indicate that dead code is widespread in open-source Java applications, underscoring how common this issue is in evolving systems and complicating long-term upkeep. This accumulation fosters a cycle of increased cognitive load for developers, as unused elements distract from active code paths and amplify the effort required for code comprehension and modification.
Economically and from a security perspective, dead code contributes to substantial costs and risks, particularly in legacy systems where it enlarges the attack surface. Historical incidents, such as the 1996 Ariane 5 rocket failure triggered by an unadapted reuse of code from a prior versioneffectively rendering parts dead under new conditionsresulted in a $370 million loss, highlighting how overlooked dead code can precipitate catastrophic failures. Similarly, a 1994 Chemical Bank error involving commented-out dead code led to a $15 million overpayment issue due to improper withdrawal logic reactivation. On the security front, dead code often conceals obsolete dependencies or functions with known vulnerabilities, providing potential entry points for attackers if paths become reachable through configuration changes or exploits, thereby expanding the overall attack surface in software ecosystems.
Removing dead code yields clear benefits, enhancing readability, narrowing the scope of testing efforts, and boosting overall code efficiency. By streamlining the codebase, elimination reduces the volume of material developers must review, fostering clearer understanding and faster onboarding for teams, while also minimizing the testing burden on irrelevant sections. This process directly improves efficiency, as evidenced by reduced build times and smaller binaries post-removal, allowing resources to focus on active functionality and ultimately lowering long-term maintenance costs. In high-impact scenarios, such cleanup has been shown to cut debugging time significantly and mitigate risks associated with bloat, promoting more sustainable software development practices.

Types

Unreachable Code

Unreachable code constitutes a fundamental category of dead code, characterized by program statements that cannot be executed due to structural control flow impediments in the source code. Specifically, it arises after unconditional control transfers, such as a return statement, break in a loop, or goto that bypasses subsequent instructions, rendering the following code permanently inaccessible. Similarly, code within branches guarded by always-false conditions, like if (false) { ... }, falls into this category, as no execution path can reach it.
Common scenarios include code following infinite loops lacking viable exit paths, switch statements with exhaustive cases that omit certain branches, and code positioned after an unconditional exception throw, where control flow terminates abruptly. For instance, duplicate conditions in chained if-else constructs can make later branches unreachable if an earlier identical condition is satisfied first. These issues often stem from coding errors but can also result from intentional but flawed program design, such as misplaced jumps in unstructured languages.
To illustrate, consider the following pseudocode example of unreachable code following an early return:
function processInput(input):
 if input is invalid:
 return error
 // This statement is unreachable due to the preceding return
 logMessage("Processing complete")
 return success
Here, the logMessage call cannot execute if the function returns early, as demonstrated in control flow graphs where the node for that statement lacks an incoming edge from the entry point under the invalid condition.
Another example involves a conditional branch leading to a bypass:
main:
 if (a < b):
 goto label2
 // Unreachable code here
 print("This never executes")
label2:
 // Continue execution
In the corresponding control flow graph, the print statement forms an isolated node with no path from the program's entry, highlighting a dead path.
The presence of unreachable code relates directly to program semantics, as its inaccessibility can be proven statically through data-flow analysis on the control flow graph, without requiring program execution or input testing. This analysis traverses the graph from the entry node, marking reachable basic blocks; any unmarked portions confirm permanent inaccessibility.
Note that uncalled functions or unimported modules also fall under unreachable code, as their bodies or contents cannot be executed from any program entry point.

Unused Code

Unused code, also known as ineffective or dead code, refers to portions of the program that can be executed but have no impact on the program's observable behavior or output, such as computations assigning values to variables that are never subsequently read. This includes dead stores, where a value is assigned to a variable but the variable is never used thereafter, rendering the assignment superfluous.
Sub-variations of unused code encompass unused parameters in functions, which are passed and the function is called but never referenced within the function body, leading to no functional effect from the parameter; and redundant constants or variables that are declared and possibly initialized but not utilized in any computations, conditions, or outputs. These elements often arise from incomplete refactoring or experimental additions that are later abandoned. Note that while uncalled functions are often detected via call graphs, they are typically classified as unreachable code rather than unused.
Detection of unused code relies on criteria such as the absence of references in symbol tables, which track variable and constant usages across scopes within executed paths. This approach focuses on static properties, distinguishing it from code that appears unused only under specific runtime conditions, like conditional branches. Static analysis tools can automate this process by traversing these structures to flag unreferenced declarations in reachable code.
The presence of unused code uniquely implies wasted computational effort, as executed statements consume resources without benefit, and contributes to namespace pollution by cluttering symbol spaces with extraneous identifiers that complicate code navigation and increase maintenance overhead.

Causes

Programming Practices

Dead code frequently originates from error-prone patterns during the initial coding phases, such as writing placeholder code intended for future features that never come to fruition. Developers may insert such code to sketch out potential extensions or to facilitate prototyping, but if the planned features are abandoned, the placeholders persist as unused segments. Similarly, conditional blocks with hardcoded false conditionsoften used to disable experimental or debugging logiccan create unreachable code paths that are overlooked during cleanup. These habits contribute to dead code accumulation, as developers focus on immediate functionality rather than rigorous pruning.
Language-specific pitfalls exacerbate this issue, particularly the overuse of defensive programming, where excessive error handlers or validation checks are added preemptively but remain uninvoked under typical execution conditions. For instance, in languages like Java or C++, developers might implement broad exception catchers or null checks that become redundant once input assumptions are validated elsewhere, leading to unused code bloat. Copy-paste artifacts compound the problem; when duplicating code blocks for reuse, extraneous variables, imports, or helper functions are often retained inadvertently, resulting in dead elements that do not align with the new context.
To mitigate these origins, best practices advocate for writing minimal viable code, prioritizing only the essential logic needed for current requirements and iteratively expanding as features solidify. Stubs and mocks, commonly used in testing or as temporary placeholders, should be employed judiciouslylimited to specific integration points and systematically refactored or eliminated post-development to prevent them from lingering as dead code. Analyses of open-source Java projects showing approximately 16% of methods classified as dead, often stemming from such incomplete implementations.

Code Maintenance Issues

Dead code often accumulates in software projects as they evolve over time, particularly through processes such as feature deprecation without subsequent cleanup, the merging of branches that introduce orphaned code segments, and framework upgrades that render certain modules obsolete. In constantly evolving systems like web applications, these dynamics lead to a gradual buildup of unused code, which hampers further development by increasing complexity and obscuring the codebase's structure. Developers may overlook removal during rapid iterations, allowing deprecated features to linger as remnants that no longer contribute to functionality but consume maintenance resources.
Inherited codebases in legacy systems present unique challenges, where dead code frequently manifests as unused APIs or components from earlier versions that persist due to incomplete documentation and the fear of disrupting established enterprise operations. In large-scale enterprise software, these artifacts accumulate across decades of incremental changes, making it difficult to distinguish active from obsolete elements without comprehensive analysis. Such legacy integrations exacerbate maintenance burdens, as teams must navigate intertwined dependencies that include dormant code.
Refactoring efforts can inadvertently contribute to dead code accumulation when partial rewrites prioritize new implementations over thorough cleanup, leaving behind unreferenced functions, variables, or entire classes that were superseded but not excised. This pitfall arises during targeted restructurings, where developers focus on preserving behavior in modified sections while neglecting broader codebase hygiene, resulting in fragmented artifacts that dilute overall maintainability.
Empirical case studies from open-source projects illustrate the growth of dead code over releases; for instance, an analysis of 23 Java desktop applications on GitHub revealed that dead methods can comprise between 0.45% and 36.75% of total methods, with many persisting across dozens of commits and showing low removal rates in successive versions. Another multi-study investigation across open-source Java systems found that approximately 16% of methods qualify as dead code on average, highlighting how such elements tend to increase during ongoing maintenance without deliberate intervention. These findings underscore the need for proactive monitoring to curb exponential accumulation in evolving projects.

Detection

Static Analysis

Static analysis detects dead code by examining the program's structure without executing it, leveraging techniques such as control-flow graphs (CFGs) to identify unreachable code paths and data-flow analyses to pinpoint unused variables or assignments. A CFG represents the program as a directed graph where nodes denote basic blocks of sequential code and edges indicate possible control transfers, allowing analysts to traverse from entry points and mark all reachable nodes; any code in unreachable nodes is definitively dead.
Reaching definitions analysis complements this by tracking variable definitions forward through the CFG to determine if they propagate to any use sites; definitions that never reach a use indicate unused variables or assignments, flagging them as dead code. For more precise detection of unused computations, liveness analysis performs a backward data-flow pass to compute where variables are livemeaning their values might be read before reassignment. This identifies dead code as assignments to variables that are never live at the point of definition. The core equations for liveness analysis are:

\text{live_out}(n) = \bigcup_{s \in \text{succ}(n)} \text{live_in}(s)

\text{live_in}(n) = \text{use}(n) \cup \left( \text{live_out}(n) \setminus \text{def}(n) \right)

where succ(n)\text{succ}(n)succ(n) are the successors of node nnn, use(n)\text{use}(n)use(n) is the set of variables read in nnn, and def(n)\text{def}(n)def(n) is the set of variables defined in nnn. These equations are solved iteratively until a fixed point is reached, enabling the elimination of non-live assignments as dead code.
Practical tools integrate these techniques into development workflows. For C and C++, the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) provides flags like -Wunused-variable and -Wunused-function to warn about unused declarations during compilation. In JavaScript, ESLint's no-unused-vars rule flags unused variables, parameters, and imports by parsing the abstract syntax tree (AST) and tracking references. Similarly, for Python, Pylint issues warnings such as unused-variable (W0612) for defined but unreferenced variables, using AST analysis to enforce usage checks.
Despite these capabilities, static analysis has inherent limitations, as it cannot resolve dead code that depends on runtime conditions, such as branches determined by external inputs or complex aliasing that defies structural approximation.

Dynamic Analysis

Dynamic analysis for detecting dead code involves instrumenting and executing programs to profile runtime behavior, identifying code paths that remain unexecuted under specific inputs or workloads. This approach contrasts with static methods by providing context-sensitive insights into input-dependent dead code, though it may miss paths not covered by the test suite.
A primary technique is code coverage measurement, which instruments the program to track executed branches, statements, and functions during runs. Tools like gcov, part of the GNU Compiler Collection, generate coverage reports that highlight unexecuted lines and branches, enabling developers to flag potential dead code after compiling with profiling flags such as -fprofile-arcs and -ftest-coverage. Similarly, JaCoCo for Java applications instruments bytecode to measure line, branch, and method coverage, producing reports that reveal empirically unused elements in tested scenarios. Instrumentation can also log call frequencies, where zero-count functions indicate dead code paths not invoked during execution.
Advanced approaches include path profiling, which traces execution paths to identify branches with zero traversals across multiple runs, and memory tracing to detect unused allocations or objects that are allocated but never accessed. Seminal work on dynamic dead-instruction detection demonstrates that profiling can eliminate instructions producing dead values most of the time, reducing runtime overhead by up to 10-20% in benchmarks. Profilers such as Valgrind's Callgrind tool generate call graphs and execution counts, helping pinpoint low- or zero-frequency code regions. Runtime monitors in integrated development environments, like Visual Studio's code metrics, further support this by aggregating coverage data from profiled executions.
The advantages of dynamic analysis include its ability to capture real-world, input-dependent dead code that static analysis might conservatively retain, as evidenced by runtime profiling in large-scale systems. However, it requires comprehensive test suites to ensure broad coverage, often necessitating multiple runs with diverse inputs, and can introduce instrumentation overhead of 5-50% depending on the tool. Incomplete testing may lead to false positives, mistaking untested but live code for dead.

Elimination

Compiler Optimizations

Compiler optimizations for dead code elimination automate the removal of unused or unreachable code during the compilation process, enhancing program efficiency and reducing resource consumption. These optimizations occur in dedicated passes within the compiler pipeline, targeting both local and global scopes to prune computations that do not affect the program's observable behavior. By leveraging analysis techniques, compilers identify and excise dead code without altering semantics, often integrating this with other transformations like constant folding to maximize impact.
Peephole optimization addresses local dead statements by examining small windows of assembly or intermediate code, such as removing instructions following an unconditional branch that render subsequent code unreachable. This technique is particularly effective for straightforward cases, like eliminating redundant assignments or jumps within a basic block. In contrast, global dead code elimination (DCE) employs data-flow analysis across the entire control-flow graph (CFG) to prune unused computations, tracking liveness to determine if variables or instructions contribute to outputs. For instance, backward data-flow analysis computes live variablesthose used on some execution pathallowing the removal of assignments to dead variables that are never read later.
These optimizations typically follow parsing, where the compiler constructs the CFG to represent control flow and then applies simplifications like unreachable code removal. Subsequent stages incorporate constant propagation, which substitutes variables with known constant values, exposing unreachable paths (e.g., conditional branches evaluating to constants) and enabling further DCE. Iterative passes refine this process: initial liveness analysis identifies obvious dead code, while subsequent iterations handle second-order effects, such as newly exposed dead instructions after prior removals. Advanced variants, like partial dead code elimination, extend this to code dead on specific paths using predication or motion techniques derived from partial redundancy elimination, ensuring optimality without restructuring branches.
In practice, the LLVM compiler infrastructure implements an aggressive DCE (ADCE) pass that assumes values are dead until proven live, similar to sparse conditional constant propagation applied to liveness, enabling more thorough elimination than standard DCE by re-evaluating dependencies iteratively. For Java, the just-in-time (JIT) compiler in the HotSpot JVM performs dead code removal at runtime, analyzing hot methods to excise unused branches or methods based on profile-guided data, integrating with tree-based intermediate representations for precise pruning.
The effectiveness of these optimizations is evident in bloated codebases, where DCE can significantly reduce executable size through iterative application, as seen in compaction techniques combining global analysis with local peephole passes; greater reductions are possible in cases with heavy redundancy when paired with interprocedural analysis. Such savings not only shrink binaries but also improve cache performance and load times, with iterative passes converging to near-optimal removal after multiple refinements.

Manual Techniques

Manual techniques for eliminating dead code rely on developer expertise during code reviews and refactoring sessions to identify and remove unused or unreachable portions of the codebase. Developers often conduct code audits, systematically examining modules or functions to detect redundancy, such as logic branches that are never executed due to conditional paths or obsolete features. These audits involve tracing code usage through manual inspection, where teams assess whether specific symbols, like variables or methods, lack references across the project.
To trace references effectively, developers utilize integrated development environment (IDE) features that support manual searches for unused symbols. For instance, in Visual Studio Code, the "Find All References" command allows users to select a symbol and view all its occurrences in the codebase, enabling quick identification of unreferenced elements. Similarly, Eclipse provides tools like "Find References" or call hierarchy views to manually explore dependencies and spot unused public classes, methods, or fields. For more complex interdependencies, dependency graphs serve as visual aids during reviews; Visual Studio's layer diagrams, for example, map code relationships to highlight isolated components that no longer contribute to the application's flow. Another approach is gradual pruning using version control diffs, where developers review commit historiessuch as Git diffsto identify code segments that have remained unchanged for extended periods or were introduced for deprecated features, facilitating targeted removal.
Best practices emphasize incremental removal to minimize risks, starting with deprecation notices in code comments or APIs before full deletion in subsequent releases. After pruning, developers run comprehensive tests, including unit and integration suites, to verify that no functionality breaks, ensuring the changes maintain system integrity. Removals should be documented in changelogs to inform the team and stakeholders of impacts, such as reduced maintenance overhead or improved performance. While compilers provide a starting point by automatically eliminating obvious dead code, manual techniques allow for human judgment in ambiguous cases, like configuration-driven execution paths.
In large codebases, challenges arise from the sheer scale and interconnectedness, making it difficult to ensure completeness without exhaustive manual effort, as developers may lack full visibility into all system components. Transitive dependencies on third-party libraries or dynamic invocation via reflection further complicate identification, potentially leading to overlooked remnants that hinder long-term maintenance.

Examples

Basic Illustration

A fundamental example of dead code occurs in a function where a conditional block is guarded by a condition that is always false, ensuring the block is never executed. Consider the following pseudocode:
function computeValue(input) {
 if (false) {
 result = input * 2; // This assignment is dead code
 print("Computed doubled value");
 }
 return 0; // Unconditional return
}
In this illustration, the if (false) condition evaluates to false under all circumstances, making the statements inside the blocksuch as the assignment to result and the print operationunreachable and thus dead code. The control flow proceeds directly to the return statement without ever entering the conditional branch, rendering those lines superfluous to the program's execution.
To visualize this, the execution path can be represented by a simple flowchart:
+----------------+ No +-------------+
| Start | ---------> | Return 0 |
| (Enter function| +-------------+
+----------------+ |
 v
 +--------+
 | End |
 +--------+
The dead path branches from the condition but is never traversed, as indicated by the "No" arrow bypassing the if-block entirely. This diagram highlights how the program's logic skips the unused segment without affecting the outcome.
Such basic instances of dead code demonstrate how seemingly innocuous additions, like remnant debugging statements or obsolete branches, can persist and accumulate. In larger systems, these simple elements scale into substantial maintenance burdens.

Real-World Case

In legacy ASP.NET web applications developed in C#, dead code often emerges during refactoring efforts, such as updating an authentication system from a custom implementation to a modern OAuth-based provider like IdentityServer. For instance, after migrating user login logic to the new provider, the original AuthModule classresponsible for handling legacy token validationbecomes entirely unreferenced, leaving behind unused methods and variables that clutter the codebase. This scenario is common in long-lived enterprise projects where features evolve incrementally, and remnants of deprecated modules persist without active calls from controllers or services.
Consider the following excerpt from an ASP.NET MVC project in C#, where the AuthModule class contains dead code post-refactor:
public class AuthModule
{
 private string legacyTokenKey = "OldAuthToken"; // Unused variable after OAuth migration

 public bool ValidateLegacyToken(string token)
 {
 // This method is no longer called from any controller or service
 if (token == null) return false;
 var decrypted = DecryptToken(token);
 return decrypted.Contains(legacyTokenKey);
 }

 private string DecryptToken(string token)
 {
 // Supporting method, also unreachable
 return AES.Decrypt(token, "legacyKey");
 }

 // Additional unused method for old session handling
 public void HandleSessionExpiry()
 {
 // Dead code: never invoked post-refactor
 HttpContext.Current.Session.Clear();
 }
}
Such unused elements, including the legacyTokenKey variable and methods like ValidateLegacyToken, illustrate function and variable dead code that survives due to oversight during integration tests.
The presence of this dead code in the project leads to tangible consequences, including increased build times as the compiler processes unnecessary classes and dependencies, and larger binary sizes. Furthermore, it sows confusion during team code reviews, where developers must navigate irrelevant logic, increasing the risk of misinterpreting intent or introducing bugs when modifying active authentication flows.
To address this, teams can employ a combined approach of static analysis using tools like ReSharper to flag unreferenced members and dynamic analysis via Coverlet for coverage reports during runtime exercises of authentication endpoints. This dual method enables cleanup in similar ASP.NET projects, removing the dead AuthModule and optimizing the dependency graph, thereby streamlining maintenance without disrupting live services.

References

CWE-561: Dead Code (4.18) - MITRE Corporation

Detecting Unreachable Code and Dead Code - learn.adacore.com

Classifying Dead Code in Software Development - PDXScholar

 Lecture Notes on Dataflow Analysis

CA1508: Avoid dead conditional code (code analysis) - .NET

A Multi-Study Investigation into Dead Code

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/error-messages/compiler-warnings/compiler-warning-level-4-c4505

Dead Code Detection With Reaper - Emerge Tools Blog

Strategies for Identifying Dead Code in .NET Applications

The Hidden Cost of Unused and Dead Code - Azul Systems

Exposing dead code: strategies for detection and elimination

Dead Code: Impact, Causes, and Remediation Strategies

http://sunnyday.mit.edu/nasa-class/Ariane5-report.html

https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg14119152-800-technology-bank-error-not-in-your-favour-lose-dollar-15-million/

Importance of Deleting Unused Code - Goldman Sachs Developer

Dead Code Elimination - GeeksforGeeks

MSC12-C. Detect and remove code that has no effect or is never executed - SEI CERT C Coding Standard - Confluence

6. Fruitful functions How to Think Like a Computer Scientist

 Control Flow Analysis - UT Computer Science

 Toward General Diagnosis of Static Errors: Technical Report

How much does unused code matter for maintenance?

CWE-563: Assignment to Variable without Use - MITRE Corporation

Code Coverage and Defensive Programming (in private functions)

Dead Code - Devopedia

The Hidden Danger of Dead Code - Unqork

 Classifying Dead Code in Software Development - PDXScholar

Dead code elimination for web systems written in PHP

Reading, Writing, and Code - ACM Queue

https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/1810295.1810306

On the spread and evolution of dead methods in Java desktop ...

Static Code Analysis: Top 7 Methods, Pros/Cons and Best Practices

Unreachable Code Elimination - Compiler Design - GeeksforGeeks

 16 - Liveness Analysis - Compiler Design

 Lecture Notes on Liveness Analysis

Warning Options (Using the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC))

no-unused-vars - ESLint - Pluggable JavaScript Linter

unused-variable / W0612 - Pylint 4.0.2 documentation

Why can't dead code detection be fully solved by a compiler?

Automating dead code cleanup - Engineering at Meta - Facebook

Static vs. dynamic code analysis: A comprehensive guide - vFunction

Gcov (Using the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC))

EclEmma - JaCoCo Java Code Coverage Library

Dynamic dead-instruction detection and elimination

https://valgrind.org/docs/manual/cl-manual.html

 Dataflow Analysis

Partial dead code elimination | ACM SIGPLAN Notices

LLVM's Analysis and Transform Passes

Understanding Java JIT Compilation with JITWatch, Part 1 - Oracle

Visual Studio Code tips and tricks

Finding unused code - InfoSupport

Validate code with dependency diagrams - Visual Studio (Windows)

Catalog of Refactorings

 CS107, Lecture 25

Finding Dead C# Code in an ASP.NET application - Blog - fuqua.io

Detect and Remove Dead Code - NDepend
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion