Defragmentation Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Defragmentation
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Defragmentation is the process of reorganizing fragmented files on a storage device, such as a hard disk drive (HDD), by relocating non-contiguous data clusters into sequential blocks to improve access efficiency and system performance.
File fragmentation arises when data is written to a disk in scattered locations, often due to ongoing operations like creating, modifying, or deleting files, which prevent the allocation of contiguous storage space and result in files being split across multiple non-adjacent clusters. This scattering increases the time required for the disk's read/write head to locate and retrieve data on HDDs, as the mechanical components must perform additional seeks between distant sectors, thereby degrading overall input/output (I/O) speeds.
The defragmentation process typically involves software utilities that first analyze the disk to identify fragmented files and free space, then move file portions to consolidate them into continuous areas while minimizing further fragmentation of empty space. Operating systems like Windows include built-in tools, such as the defrag command, to automate this consolidation on local volumes, often scheduling it periodically to maintain optimal performance without user intervention.
In modern computing, defragmentation remains essential for HDDs to counteract performance degradation from fragmentation, but it is largely irrelevantand even counterproductivefor solid-state drives (SSDs), which use flash memory without moving parts and thus do not suffer seek-time penalties. For SSDs, repeated defragmentation can accelerate wear on memory cells through unnecessary write cycles, so optimization focuses instead on TRIM commands that efficiently manage unused space and garbage collection. As SSDs have become prevalent in consumer and enterprise storage, many systems now automatically detect drive types and apply defragmentation only to mechanical disks, reflecting an evolution in storage maintenance practices.

Fundamentals of Fragmentation

Definition and Types

Fragmentation in file systems refers to the condition where portions of a file's data are stored in non-contiguous sectors on a storage device, such as a hard disk drive, resulting in increased seek times and inefficient data access during read or write operations. This scattering disrupts the sequential layout that storage devices are optimized for, as heads must move to multiple locations to retrieve a single file.
There are two main types of fragmentation: internal and external. Internal fragmentation arises when the file system's allocation unitsfixed-size blocks or clustersare larger than the actual data they contain, leaving unused space within those units and wasting storage capacity. For example, if a 1 KB cluster holds only 300 bytes of data, the remaining 700 bytes represent internal fragmentation. In contrast, external fragmentation occurs when available free space on the disk is divided into small, non-contiguous segments that cannot be combined to accommodate larger files, even though sufficient total free space exists. This type scatters file extents across the disk, complicating contiguous allocation for new or growing files.
File systems manage storage through allocation units, commonly called clusters in systems like NTFS or blocks in others, which represent the minimum amount of disk space that can be assigned to a file. These units contribute to fragmentation because files must be allocated in multiples of their size, leading to internal waste for partial units, while repeated allocations and deallocations over time fragment free space externally. Larger cluster sizes minimize external fragmentation by reducing the number of units needed but exacerbate internal fragmentation for small files, whereas smaller clusters have the opposite effect.
The concept of fragmentation and the need for defragmentation originated in the 1970s with mainframe computing systems, where early file management techniques on magnetic tapes and disks first highlighted the inefficiencies of non-contiguous storage.

Causes and Examples

Fragmentation in file systems primarily arises from repeated file creation, deletion, growth, and modification, which lead to scattered allocation of data blocks across the storage medium. When files are created or modified, the file system allocates blocks from available free space; however, as files grow incrementally, new blocks may be placed in non-contiguous locations if adjacent space is occupied by other data. Deletions exacerbate this by leaving irregular gaps in the storage layout, fragmenting free space and forcing subsequent allocations to split files into multiple non-adjacent extents. This process builds external fragmentation, where free space exists but is not contiguous enough to satisfy large allocation requests, as opposed to internal fragmentation, which involves unused space within allocated blocks.
A concrete example of fragmentation development can be seen in a simulated disk scenario starting with a contiguous block of free space. Initially, writing three sequential filesA (10 blocks), B (20 blocks), and C (10 blocks)allocates them adjacently without fragmentation. Deleting the middle file B then creates a 20-block gap between A and C, fragmenting the free space. Attempting to write a new 15-block file D now forces allocation of the first 15 blocks from the gap, leaving a 5-block remnant; if D grows to 25 blocks later, the additional 10 blocks must be placed elsewhere, such as after C, splitting D into two extents and further scattering free space into non-contiguous segments. This illustrates how routine operations transform a unified storage area into a patchwork of isolated blocks.
To quantify fragmentation, a common index measures the excess extents beyond the ideal one per file, calculated as totalextentsfilecountfilecount100\frac{\text{total extents} - \text{file count}}{\text{file count}} \times 100filecounttotalextentsfilecount100. For instance, if a system has 1,000 files spread across 2,500 extents, the index is 250010001000100=150%\frac{2500 - 1000}{1000} \times 100 = 150\%100025001000100=150%, indicating on average 1.5 extra extents per file and significant scattering. This metric, akin to the degree of fragmentation (DoF) where DoF equals total extents divided by file count, highlights the scale of non-contiguity without delving into performance implications.

Effects of Fragmentation

Performance Degradation

Fragmentation leads to non-contiguous allocation of file blocks on disk, requiring the read/write head of a hard disk drive (HDD) to perform multiple seeks to access a single file, thereby increasing average seek times significantly. In the HDD era, a typical unfragmented file might incur a single seek of 5-10 ms, but for a moderately fragmented file with 3-5 extents, this can rise to 20-50 ms due to repeated head movements between dispersed sectors.
This degradation directly impacts input/output (I/O) throughput, as fragmentation converts sequential reads into a series of random accesses, multiplying the number of seeks. The effective access time for a disk operation can be modeled as:
Taccess=Tseek+Trot+Ttransfer
T_{\text{access}} = T_{\text{seek}} + T_{\text{rot}} + T_{\text{transfer}}
Taccess=Tseek+Trot+Ttransfer
where TseekT_{\text{seek}}Tseek is the seek time (amplified by fragmentation), TrotT_{\text{rot}}Trot is rotational latency (typically 4-8 ms for 7200 RPM drives), and TtransferT_{\text{transfer}}Ttransfer is the data transfer time; fragmentation primarily inflates TseekT_{\text{seek}}Tseek by adding terms for each additional extent, potentially reducing overall throughput for scattered files.
Benchmarks from the 1990s and 2000s, including analyses of NTFS volumes, demonstrate slowdowns of 20-50% in file access times on heavily fragmented drives, with some operations like file saves or searches experiencing up to 1489% longer durations in extreme cases. For instance, studies on Windows workstations showed NTFS fragmentation causing I/O request rates to exceed 250 per second, compared to near-zero on defragmented volumes, leading to measurable efficiency losses.
These effects manifest in practical applications, such as prolonged boot times from scattered system files, slower database query responses due to fragmented indexes and data extents, and stuttering during video playback as the head jumps between non-contiguous media blocks.

Long-Term Storage Impacts

Internal fragmentation in file systems arises when allocated storage blocks are larger than the data they hold, leaving unused space within those blocks. This inefficiency is particularly pronounced with small files stored on systems using large cluster sizes, such as 4 KB blocks for files averaging 2 KB in size. In extreme cases, this can result in approximately 50% of disk space being wasted, as noted in the design of the Fast File System (FFS) for UNIX, where initial block sizing led to substantial internal waste before mitigation via sub-blocks.
External fragmentation, by contrast, occurs when free space becomes divided into numerous small, scattered regions that cannot accommodate new allocations larger than the available holes. This "Swiss cheese" effect diminishes usable capacity, as the total free space exists but is rendered ineffective for larger files or blocks. Studies on disk allocation methods, such as buddy systems, indicate external fragmentation can waste up to 10% of storage capacity under typical workloads.
Beyond capacity loss, fragmentation imposes hardware stress on mechanical storage devices like hard disk drives (HDDs). Scattered file extents require excessive head movements to access data, increasing seek operations and accelerating mechanical wear on platters and actuators. This prolonged exposure to friction and motion can shorten HDD lifespan, as fragmentation exacerbates the physical demands of non-sequential I/O patterns.
In enterprise environments, fragmentation's capacity impacts are evident in real-world deployments, such as NetApp's WAFL file system, where intra-block and free space fragmentation lead to notable storage inefficiencies over time. A 2020 analysis of WAFL revealed that without countermeasures, these effects compound in large-scale volumes, reducing effective capacity through wasted sub-blocks and fragmented object storage, though exact percentages vary by workload.

Defragmentation Processes

Core Algorithms

The core algorithms for defragmentation operate by analyzing the file allocation structures to detect and resolve non-contiguous storage of file data, ensuring files are placed in sequential blocks to minimize seek times. The process begins with scanning the file allocation table or equivalent metadata, such as a bitmap of allocated and free clusters, to map out the current layout of all files on the storage device. Fragmented files are identified as those spanning multiple non-adjacent extents, where an extent represents a contiguous sequence of allocation units assigned to a file; typically, any file with more than one extent is considered fragmented. Once identified, the algorithm locates available contiguous free spaceoften by consolidating smaller free gaps if necessaryand relocates the file's extents to this space, followed by updating the metadata to reflect the new allocation. This relocation preserves file integrity by copying data in full blocks, avoiding partial overwrites.
Consolidation techniques in defragmentation algorithms vary between moving entire files as single units and partial reassembly of individual extents, depending on the available space and efficiency goals. In a full-file move approach, the entire file is treated as a unit and shifted to a new contiguous location only if sufficient free space exists, which simplifies metadata updates but may require temporary space equivalent to the file size. Partial reassembly, conversely, handles extents independently, allowing incremental improvements even in constrained environments by shifting fragments one at a time to merge them progressively. A simple linear sweep algorithm exemplifies this, iterating through files and extents in order while scanning for free space from the beginning of the disk. The following pseudocode illustrates a basic implementation:
for each file in allocation_table:
 extents = get_file_extents(file)
 if len(extents) > 1: # Fragmented
 contiguous_space = find_largest_free_block(sum(extent.size for extent in extents))
 if contiguous_space is available:
 for extent in extents:
 move_data(extent.start, contiguous_space.current_pos, extent.size)
 contiguous_space.current_pos += extent.size
 update_allocation_table(file, contiguous_space.start)
This linear approach processes files sequentially without advanced sorting, prioritizing simplicity over optimal placement.
Optimization heuristics enhance these algorithms by guiding relocation decisions to maximize long-term performance gains, often using metrics to quantify fragmentation severity. A common fragmentation score is calculated as the sum over all files of (number of extents per file minus 1), divided by the total number of files, representing the average number of gaps per file and thus the overall degree of dispersion; scores near zero indicate minimal fragmentation, while higher values signal the need for intervention. Heuristics may prioritize large files first, as they contribute disproportionately to seek overhead, or focus on "hot" datafrequently accessed files identified via access logsto reduce immediate latency impacts. For instance, algorithms can sort extents by size or access frequency before relocation, aiming to cluster related files near the disk's faster inner tracks.
These algorithms involve inherent trade-offs between computational efficiency and resource demands. Scanning the allocation table and identifying fragments requires O(n) time, where n is the number of allocation units, but sorting extents for optimal placement introduces O(n log n) complexity due to comparison-based ordering. Space requirements during relocation can demand up to 10-20% of the disk's capacity as temporary buffer for moving data without data loss, particularly in partial reassembly methods that overlap source and target areas. In low-free-space scenarios, these trade-offs may extend runtime significantly, as repeated passes become necessary to iteratively consolidate space.

Online and Offline Methods

Online defragmentation operates as a background process that allows concurrent file access and system usage during execution, minimizing disruption to normal operations. This method employs incremental file relocation techniques, such as moving portions of files while the system remains active, to gradually reorganize fragmented data without requiring a full system halt. Introduced in Windows XP, the built-in Disk Defragmenter tool exemplifies this approach; Windows XP also performs limited partial defragmentation approximately every three days when the system is idle. By leveraging idle CPU and disk resources, online defragmentation avoids the need for boot-time preloading in most modern implementations, though it may skip locked or actively used files to prevent data corruption.
In contrast, offline defragmentation necessitates a complete system shutdown or boot into a specialized environment, such as a command-line interface, to enable unrestricted access to all files for thorough reorganization. This mode was prevalent in early computing systems, where the DEFRAG utility in MS-DOS 6.0 (introduced in 1993, building on 1980s-era tools like Norton Utilities' SpeedDisk) required running from the DOS prompt to optimize disk layout by sorting and consolidating files without multitasking interference. Offline methods achieve more comprehensive results by relocating every file fragment, including system files, but demand exclusive disk control, often involving a restart to apply changes fully.
Comparing the two, online defragmentation offers the benefit of minimal downtime and seamless integration into daily workflows. Offline defragmentation provides superior thoroughness, reducing fragmentation more effectively across the entire volume, yet incurs significant downtimetypically 1 to 8 hours for large HDDs exceeding 1TBmaking it suitable only for maintenance windows. To mitigate these trade-offs without full defragmentation, disk partitioning divides storage into logical zones, isolating high-activity areas like the operating system from data partitions to limit fragmentation spread and shorten defragmentation times per section.

File System Specific Approaches

FAT and exFAT Systems

The File Allocation Table (FAT) in FAT file systems serves as a map of available disk space, organizing files as chains of clusters linked in a singly-linked list structure. This design allows files larger than a single cluster to span multiple non-contiguous areas, resulting in chaining fragmentation where scattered clusters increase seek times during reads and writes. Defragmentation addresses this by relocating file clusters to contiguous blocks and updating the FAT entries to reflect the new linear chains, thereby reducing head movement on mechanical drives.
Early defragmentation tools for FAT systems, such as the DEFRAG utility introduced with MS-DOS 6.0 in 1993, targeted FAT12 and FAT16 volumes by analyzing and reorganizing these cluster chains. However, these tools operated offline, requiring exclusive access to the volume and lacking support for open files or running applications, which necessitated booting from external media like a floppy disk.
FAT32, an extension supporting larger volumes, inherits the same linked-list allocation but faces specific challenges due to its 32-bit cluster addressing, which limits practical partition sizes to 2 TB under MBR partitioning schemes commonly used in legacy systems. This constraint results in a greater number of smaller clusters on large volumes, exacerbating fragmentation as free space becomes more dispersed over time.
exFAT builds on the FAT framework with enhancements for modern storage, including support for cluster sizes up to 32 MB, which minimizes internal fragmentation by reducing unused slack space within clusters for large files. Despite these improvements, exFAT retains the potential for external fragmentation through similar cluster chaining in the allocation table. Native Windows defragmentation tools do not support exFAT volumes, necessitating third-party solutions like UltraDefrag, which can analyze and consolidate exFAT clusters while the system remains online.

NTFS and ReFS Systems

The New Technology File System (NTFS), introduced by Microsoft in 1993, employs advanced defragmentation strategies centered on its Master File Table (MFT), a critical metadata structure that stores file attributes and locations for all files on the volume. During defragmentation, NTFS tools prioritize consolidating the MFT to make it contiguous and reduce fragmentation, thereby minimizing seek times on mechanical hard drives, as the MFT is accessed frequently for file operations, enhancing overall system performance. This consolidation is typically achieved through boot-time operations for full effect, as parts of the MFT cannot be modified while the volume is mounted. The built-in Optimize Drives tool, available in Windows 10 and later versions, performs automated defragmentation of user files and partial MFT optimization during scheduled maintenance, but it has limitations in fully optimizing system metadata without third-party assistance.
NTFS's journaling mechanism, implemented via the $LogFile system file, plays a pivotal role in maintaining volume integrity during defragmentation by logging all metadata changes as transactions. This ensures atomicity and recoverability; if a power failure or crash occurs mid-process, the journal allows NTFS to replay or roll back operations upon reboot, preventing corruption of the file system structure. For instance, $LogFile records updates to the MFT during relocation, enabling fsck-like recovery tools such as chkdsk to restore consistency without data loss. This journaling contrasts with non-journaled systems by reducing downtime and risk in defragmentation tasks.
The Resilient File System (ReFS), introduced in Windows Server 2012, diverges from NTFS through its log-structured design, which appends new data sequentially to reduce inherent fragmentation by avoiding in-place updates to existing blocks. This architecture minimizes the need for traditional defragmentation, as file allocations grow contiguously in a log-like manner, though metadata and certain operations can still fragment over time. Instead, ReFS defragmentation emphasizes optimization for tiered storage environments, such as Storage Spaces, where the tool reallocates data across performance tiers (e.g., SSD for hot data and HDD for cold data) to balance speed and capacity. ReFS also incorporates journaling similar to NTFS but streamlined for resilience, using update sequence numbers to verify integrity during these optimizations.
For both NTFS and ReFS, Microsoft's built-in defragmentation tools provide baseline functionality via the defrag command or Optimize Drives interface, supporting online analysis and slab consolidation without full volume dismounts. However, third-party solutions like Diskeeper offer enhanced capabilities, such as deeper MFT relocation and real-time defragmentation, which are particularly useful for heavily loaded servers. In NTFS volumes using compression (enabled via file or folder attributes), defragmentation gains added complexity, as compressed data streams fragment more readily due to variable block sizes and partial cluster utilization, often requiring specialized handling to avoid performance regressions.

Modern Storage Considerations

Hard Disk Drives

Defragmentation on hard disk drives (HDDs) addresses the inherent mechanical limitations of spinning platters by consolidating fragmented files into contiguous blocks, thereby reducing the frequency of read/write head movements and associated rotational latencies. Fragmented data scatters file pieces across the disk, compelling the actuator arm to perform multiple seekstypically 8-12 milliseconds eachand endure rotational delays of up to 8.3 milliseconds for a 7200 RPM drive, which collectively degrade access times and transform sequential reads into inefficient random operations. This reorganization optimizes sequential access patterns, where the head can stream data continuously without interruption, boosting throughput and random IOPS; for example, benchmarks show access times dropping from 13 milliseconds in fragmented states (yielding ~77 IOPS) to 7.5 milliseconds post-defragmentation (exceeding 130 IOPS). Such improvements are particularly pronounced for large file operations, as contiguous storage aligns with the HDD's strengths in linear data transfer rates of 100-200 MB/s.
Best practices for HDD defragmentation emphasize proactive scheduling to prevent excessive fragmentation, with Windows automatically optimizing drives weekly by default to sustain performance without user intervention. It is advisable to initiate manual defragmentation when fragmentation surpasses 10%, using integrated tools like the Optimize Drives utility, which can precede or follow CHKDSK /F scans to verify and repair file system errors before rearranging data. This frequency balances benefits against the process's resource demands, ensuring minimal disruption during idle periods such as overnight.
While defragmentation yields clear mechanical advantages, it introduces temporary limitations, including spikes in disk activity and potential short-term fragmentation increases as files are iteratively moved and consolidated during the multi-pass algorithm. Additionally, the process itself incurs mechanical wear, though regular application mitigates long-term strain on components like the voice coil actuator, thereby extending overall drive lifespan through reduced head movements.
Illustrative benchmarks on a 1TB HDD, such as the Seagate Barracuda ST31000340AS, reveal substantial gains in practical tasks; post-defragmentation file copy speeds for large datasets improved by approximately 40-100%, with average read rates rising from 31 MB/s in fragmented conditions to 68 MB/s for contiguous access, directly enhancing transfer efficiency in real-world scenarios like media backups.

Solid-State Drives

Solid-state drives (SSDs) rely on NAND flash memory, which lacks the mechanical read/write heads found in traditional hard disk drives, eliminating seek times associated with accessing fragmented files. As a result, file fragmentation primarily impacts metadata overhead in the file system and can cause performance degradation through mechanisms like die-level collisions, leading to increased read latencies (up to 2.7x-4.4x in high fragmentation scenarios on NVMe SSDs as of 2024).
The TRIM command, introduced in the ATA specification in 2009, further mitigates fragmentation effects by allowing the operating system to notify the SSD of deleted data blocks, enabling efficient garbage collection and erasure during idle periods without manual intervention. This process helps maintain consistent performance by preparing free space proactively, reducing the need for defragmentation to reorganize files.
However, performing defragmentation on SSDs introduces risks due to write amplification, where rearranging files triggers additional program/erase cycles on NAND cells, potentially accelerating wear by factors of 2-10 times the nominal write volume. Each erase cycle contributes to finite NAND endurance limits, shortening the drive's lifespan unnecessarily since the performance benefits are outweighed by the wear costs.
Modern operating systems address these concerns through built-in optimizations; for instance, Windows 7 and later versions automatically detect SSDs and disable traditional defragmentation, replacing it with TRIM operations while ensuring proper 4K sector alignment to minimize overhead from the outset. These measures preserve SSD longevity and performance without user intervention.
Empirical studies indicate variable impacts of fragmentation on SSDs; for example, 2015 tests in SAN environments showed performance degradation of 25% or more for I/O-intensive workloads, while 2024 research highlights up to 4x losses in read times on modern NVMe SSDs under high fragmentation, in contrast to greater losses (over 30%) on HDDsunderscoring why defragmentation remains inadvisable for flash-based storage due to wear risks despite these effects.

Hybrid and Emerging Storage

Hybrid solid-state hybrid drives (SSHDs) integrate a small SSD cache with a traditional HDD platter to accelerate access to frequently used data while maintaining higher storage capacities at lower costs. In these systems, defragmentation primarily targets the HDD portion, where files are stored contiguously to reduce seek times, as the SSD cache automatically manages hot data without user intervention to preserve its lifespan. For example, Seagate's FireCuda series, introduced in 2016 as an evolution of earlier SSHD designs dating back to 2013, recommends optimizing the mechanical disk while disabling automatic defragmentation on the cache to prevent performance degradation.
Emerging non-volatile memory technologies like Intel Optane, launched in 2017, further challenge traditional defragmentation paradigms by offering persistent memory (PMem) with latencies closer to DRAM than conventional storage. This low-latency architecture minimizes the performance penalties associated with fragmented access patterns, as data can be addressed byte-by-byte rather than in blocks, rendering file-level fragmentation less impactful. Operating systems such as Windows classify Optane volumes as SSDs, automatically disabling defragmentation tools, while firmware handles internal data organization without requiring user-initiated processes.
In NVMe-based systems, which enable high-speed SSD interfaces, fragmentation effects are similarly diminished due to parallel access and low seek times, often managed through firmware optimizations rather than explicit defragmentation. For cloud and virtualized storage environments, such as Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic Block Store (EBS), fragmentation manifests differently in distributed block-level volumes replicated across multiple servers. AWS mitigates these issues through automated mechanisms like elastic volume modifications for dynamic resizing and snapshot archiving for tiered storage, prioritizing replication and throughput optimization over conventional defragmentation to ensure consistent performance in virtual setups.
As storage evolves in the 2020s, hybrid and emerging technologies increasingly incorporate intelligent management to preempt fragmentation, with AI enhancing predictive data placement and tiering in systems like modern object storage platforms.

References

Defragmenting Files - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Introducing computing and IT: 5.5 Fragmentation | OpenLearn

defrag | Microsoft Learn

Defragment / optimize your data drives in Windows - Microsoft Support

Should i defragment an SSD? - Microsoft Q&A

What Is Disk Fragmentation? | ESF - Enterprise Storage Forum

Difference between Internal and External fragmentation

Lecture 11: File Systems

What is "external fragmentation" in a file system?

Cluster size recommendations for ReFS and NTFS

https://www.lenovo.com/us/en/glossary/allocation-unit/

Any reason not to use 512-bytes clusters for NTFS? - Server Fault

Was Norton utilities the first disk defragmenter?

 We Ain't Afraid of No File Fragmentation: Causes and Prevention of ...

 A Contemporary Investigation of NTFS File Fragmentation - DFRWS

On the external storage fragmentation produced by first-fit and best ...

Hard Drive Seek Time: What It Means (And Why It Matters)

What is the Future of Disk Drives, Death or Rebirth? - ResearchGate

 The Impact of Disk Fragmentation | Condusiv

Disk Fragmentation and System Performance

Disk File Allocation Based on the Buddy System - ACM Digital Library

Countering Fragmentation in an Enterprise Storage System

None

https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man1/filefrag.1.html

 A Tutorial on Disk Defragmentation for Windows NT/2000/XP and ...

Defragment / optimize your data drives in Windows - Microsoft Support

Do I still need to defrag my hard drive? - Super User

DEFRAG - DOS Command

Hard Drive Defragmentation - Sound On Sound

Difference between online and offline defrag (Exchange Server)?

Defragmentation Explained: Boost Your PC Performance - HP

 Disk Performance Optimization Chapter 12

Microsoft MS-DOS 6.00 - PCjs Machines

Overview of FAT, HPFS, and NTFS File Systems - Windows Client

exFAT File System Specification - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Overview of UltraDefrag

How NTFS reserves space for MFT - Windows Server - Microsoft Learn

A trick to move NTFS System Files (Also known as Metadata and ...

NTFS Transaction Journal

Resilient File System (ReFS) overview - Microsoft Learn

Resilient File System (ReFS): Log-Structured - StarWind

ReFS Overview - NTFS.com

What Is NTFS And How Does It Work? | Definition from TechTarget

https://www.ntfs.com/ntfs_optimization.htm

Realities of Hard Drive Fragmentation - Overclockers

Hard Drive Defragmenting: What Is It and Should You Do It?

https://www.crucial.com/articles/pc-users/how-to-defrag-hard-drive

https://www.crucial.com/articles/about-ssd/should-you-defrag-an-ssd

Using TRIM features on SSDs before or without Windows 7

 Enabling TRIM Support in SSD RAIDs

 ssd write amplification | viking technology

Optimize Windows 7 for use with a Solid State Drive (SSD) (page 2 ...

Does Fragmentation Hurt SSD Performance?

Can I Defragment a Solid State Hybrid Drive (SSHD)?

Defrag/TRIM settings for hybrid hard drive? - Super User

Why Does "Defragment and Optimize Drives" App Offer to ... - Intel

 Intel Optane Memory: Deployment and Management Guide for ...

Amazon EBS volume performance

What is Amazon Elastic Block Store? - Amazon EBS
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion