Dymola Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Dymola
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Dymola, an acronym for Dynamic Modeling Laboratory, is a commercial software tool developed by Dassault Systmes for modeling, simulation, and analysis of complex, integrated multi-domain physical systems. It employs the open-standard Modelica modeling language, which supports object-oriented, equation-based descriptions of system behavior, allowing seamless integration of components from diverse engineering domains including mechanics, electronics, hydraulics, pneumatics, thermal, and control systems. Primarily used in industries such as automotive, aerospace, robotics, and process engineering, Dymola facilitates tasks like system design optimization, parameter sweeps, model calibration against real-world data, and hardware-in-the-loop testing.
The origins of Dymola trace back to 1978, when Hilding Elmqvist developed its initial version as part of his PhD dissertation at Lund University in Sweden, initially implemented in Simula 68 with an alphanumerical interface for translating models to the Simnon simulator. Over the following decades, the software evolved through key advancements: in 1992, it addressed algebraic loops and singularities in collaboration with the German Aerospace Center (DLR); by 1993, it incorporated discontinuous process modeling and was recoded in C; and in 1994, it introduced tearing variables for efficient equation handling along with the Dymodraw graphical user interface. A pivotal shift occurred in 1996 when the language was revised into the Modelica standard, incorporating a "relaxing" algorithm for improved numerical stability, which laid the foundation for modern multi-domain modeling.
Originally commercialized by Dynasim AB in Sweden, Dymola was acquired by Dassault Systmes in 2006 and integrated into the CATIA portfolio as a core component for systems engineering. Subsequent developments have emphasized enhanced graphical interfaces, Python scripting support, integration with tools like Simulink, and compliance with the Functional Mock-up Interface (FMI) standard for model exchange. These features enable users to build reusable model libraries, perform advanced simulations using solvers for ordinary differential-algebraic equations, and optimize system performance, making Dymola a cornerstone for model-based design in engineering workflows.

Overview

Description and Purpose

Dymola, short for Dynamic Modeling Laboratory, is a commercial software environment designed for modeling and simulation of integrated and complex multi-domain physical systems. It enables engineers to create, test, simulate, and analyze dynamic systems that span multiple engineering disciplines, such as mechanical, electrical, thermal, and hydraulic domains.
The primary purpose of Dymola is to facilitate the rapid development and analysis of complex systems using an object-oriented, acausal modeling approach, which reduces development time and enhances simulation accuracy by allowing models to describe system behavior declaratively rather than through sequential equations. This methodology supports the modeling of systems with ordinary differential and algebraic equations, making it suitable for applications requiring high-fidelity predictions of system interactions.
Key benefits include hierarchical modeling for building complex systems from reusable components, which promotes efficiency and modularity, and seamless integration across domains to enable holistic simulations of real-world phenomena. By leveraging domain-specific libraries, Dymola allows for the reuse of validated models, minimizing errors and accelerating the design process.
As of 2025, Dymola is owned and developed by Dassault Systmes, integrated as a core component of their 3DEXPERIENCE platform to support collaborative engineering workflows. It utilizes the open Modelica modeling language as its foundation, providing a standardized, equation-based syntax for describing system dynamics.

Core Technology: Modelica

Modelica is an open, non-proprietary, object-oriented, equation-based modeling language designed for the description of complex, heterogeneous physical systems, including cyber-physical components. It enables the creation of reusable models through declarative equations that describe system behavior without specifying the order of computation, facilitating multi-domain integration across fields such as mechanics, electrical circuits, thermodynamics, and control systems. Developed and maintained by the Modelica Association, the language supports library development and model exchange, promoting standardization in system modeling. As of November 2025, Dymola supports Modelica language version 3.6 and the Modelica Standard Library up to version 4.1.0.
Central to Modelica's design are several key paradigms that distinguish it from traditional procedural languages. Acausal modeling allows components to be connected via mathematical equations rather than fixed input-output assignments, enabling the compiler to infer causality and solve the system dynamically. This declarative syntax permits automatic equation sorting and reduction, where the tool symbolically manipulates the equations to generate an efficient simulation model, handling dependencies across variables without manual intervention. Additionally, Modelica provides inherent multi-domain support, allowing seamless integration of models from diverse physical domainslike rotational mechanics and electrical networksthrough unified equation-based interfaces that ensure physical consistency.
In Dymola, Modelica models are implemented through a robust translation and compilation process that transforms declarative equations into efficient executable code. Dymola first performs symbolic manipulation on the model equations to flatten, sort, and index the differential-algebraic equations (DAEs), producing intermediate C code that is then compiled into standalone executables for simulation. This approach supports hybrid continuous-discrete systems by integrating continuous dynamics with discrete events, such as state switches or sampled-data controls, using event-handling mechanisms to maintain numerical stability during transitions. Furthermore, Dymola addresses over- and under-determined systemscommon in high-index DAEsvia advanced structural analysis and dynamic state selection, resolving structural singularities and ensuring solvability without user-specified causalities.
A basic example of Modelica syntax for a simple translational mass-spring-damper system illustrates these equation-based principles. The model declares parameters and variables acausally, with the dynamics expressed through balanced equations:
model MassSpringDamper
 parameter Real m = 1 "Mass (kg)";
 parameter Real c = 100 "Spring constant (N/m)";
 parameter Real d = 7 "Damping constant (N.s/m)";
 Real x "Position (m)";
 Real v "Velocity (m/s)";
 Real F "External force (N)";
equation
 der(x) = v;
 m * der(v) = -c * x - d * v + F;
end MassSpringDamper;
Here, the equations define the relationships without assigning derivatives to specific variables, allowing the tool to select states (e.g., position and velocity) automatically.

History

Early Development

The early development of Dymola began in 1978 with Hilding Elmqvist's PhD dissertation at the Lund Institute of Technology, where he introduced the first version of Dymola as a specialized language for the dynamic modeling of physical systems. Titled "A Structured Model Language for Large Continuous Systems," the dissertation outlined Dymolastanding for Dynamic Modeling Laboratoryas a tool to describe complex physical behaviors through declarative equations rather than sequential procedural code. This foundational work addressed the limitations of existing simulation approaches by enabling users to model systems in a way that mirrored their physical interconnections.
The initial focus of Dymola's development centered on equation-based modeling techniques designed to manage large-scale simulations of continuous systems, with early prototypes emphasizing hierarchical and modular system descriptions. These prototypes allowed models to be built as structured hierarchies, where components could be defined, reused, and interconnected declaratively, facilitating the representation of intricate physical interactions without predefined causal directions. Key innovations included the introduction of acausal modeling concepts, which permitted equations to express relationships bidirectionally, and seamless integration with external simulation solvers to handle the numerical solution of the resulting differential-algebraic equation sets for continuous dynamics.
By the mid-1990s, Elmqvist played a pivotal role in transitioning Dymola toward broader adoption, initiating the Modelica design effort in September 1996 as part of an international collaboration under the ESPRIT project "Simulation in Europe Basic Research Working Group." This effort aimed to standardize an object-oriented, equation-based language for physical modeling, leading to adaptations in Dymola to support the emerging Modelica specification and enable model exchange across tools.

Commercialization and Acquisitions

Dynasim AB was founded in January 1992 by Hilding Elmqvist in Lund, Sweden, with the primary goal of commercializing Dymola as a professional modeling and simulation tool. This transition from academic development to a commercial enterprise marked the beginning of Dymola's broader industry adoption, building on its earlier prototypes to address multi-domain engineering challenges.
During the late 1990s and 2000s, Dymola gained significant traction in industrial applications, exemplified by its early use in the development of Toyota's Prius hybrid vehicle, where Toyota acquired licenses in mid-1996 to model the hybrid drivetrain. Concurrently, Dymola incorporated support for the newly released Modelica 1.0 specification in September 1997, enabling a prototype implementation that facilitated object-oriented, multi-physics modeling and paved the way for subsequent versions aligned with evolving Modelica standards. These advancements contributed to Dymola's growing reputation as a versatile tool for complex system simulations across engineering sectors.
In 2006, Dassault Systmes acquired Dynasim AB, integrating Dymola into its portfolio and initiating its alignment with the CATIA software suite for enhanced product lifecycle management (PLM) capabilities. This acquisition expanded Dymola's reach within Dassault's ecosystem, fostering synergies in multi-engineering simulations and broader PLM workflows.
By 2025, Dymola had evolved to version 2025x, released in November 2024 with a refresh in April 2025, introducing improvements such as faster Modelica function simulations, enhanced parameter optimization, and advanced code generation for real-time applications like hardware-in-the-loop testing. These updates have deepened Dymola's integration with the 3DEXPERIENCE platform, enabling collaborative engineering environments that support shared model development and system-level analysis across distributed teams.

Application Domains

Automotive

Dymola facilitates the modeling and simulation of complex automotive systems, particularly in areas such as hybrid powertrains, vehicle dynamics, advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS), and battery management for electric vehicles (EVs). In hybrid powertrain development, engineers use Dymola to integrate components like engines, electric motors, transmissions, and energy storage systems, enabling the analysis of energy flows, efficiency, and control strategies under various driving conditions. For vehicle dynamics, the software supports simulations of suspension, steering, and tire interactions to evaluate handling, stability, and ride comfort. ADAS modeling in Dymola involves co-simulation with sensor models and control algorithms to test features like adaptive cruise control and lane-keeping assistance in virtual environments. Battery management systems for EVs are modeled to predict thermal behavior, state-of-charge estimation, and cell balancing, incorporating electrochemical and thermal dynamics to optimize performance and longevity.
A notable case example is the development of the Toyota Prius in 1996, where Dymola was employed for integrating the engine and control systems in the hybrid powertrain. Toyota engineers utilized Dymola's capabilities to simulate multi-domain interactions, including mechanical, electrical, and thermal aspects, which accelerated the validation of the hybrid system's design and control logic before physical prototyping. This early adoption highlighted Dymola's role in enabling rapid iteration and reducing development risks for groundbreaking hybrid vehicle technology.
The use of Dymola in automotive applications yields significant benefits, including substantial reductions in prototyping costs through virtual simulation of multi-physics interactions, such as thermal management in EVs. By modeling coupled phenomena like battery cooling, cabin heating, and powertrain efficiency, engineers can optimize designs iteratively without building multiple hardware prototypes, shortening development time in complex system integration phases. These simulations also enhance safety by identifying potential failure modes in thermal runaway or driveline vibrations early in the design cycle.
Dymola leverages industry-specific libraries, notably the Modelica Standard Library, which provides foundational components for driveline and chassis modeling. The library's Rotational and MultiBody packages offer reusable models for gears, differentials, springs, dampers, and rigid bodies, allowing seamless assembly of vehicle subsystems like front-wheel-drive configurations or full chassis dynamics. These standardized elements promote model reusability and interoperability across automotive projects, facilitating compliance with industry standards for simulation accuracy.

Aerospace and Defense

Dymola plays a significant role in aerospace engineering by enabling high-fidelity simulations of aircraft systems, leveraging Modelica libraries tailored for flight dynamics and multi-body mechanics. In aircraft control systems, the Flight Dynamics library facilitates the design and analysis of multi-disciplinary control laws, allowing engineers to model interactions between aerodynamics, propulsion, and structural dynamics for enhanced stability and performance.
Propulsion modeling in Dymola supports the simulation of jet engines and electrified powertrains, integrating thermal systems and fluid dynamics to optimize thrust and efficiency under varying flight conditions. For instance, the Jet Propulsion Library provides components for modeling aircraft engines, enabling detailed analysis of turbine performance and fuel consumption. The Aviation Systems library further connects propulsion models with nonlinear aerodynamics, simulating effects like wind shear and atmospheric variations for realistic mission profiles.
Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) dynamics are modeled effectively in Dymola through object-oriented frameworks that incorporate rigid body dynamics, electric propulsion, and control algorithms, as demonstrated in studies of quadrotor UAVs with integrated power systems. Structural analysis under extreme conditions, such as high-altitude vibrations or thermal stresses, utilizes the Flexible Bodies library to represent modal bodies from finite element analysis, supporting buckling and thermo-elastic effects in components like helicopter rotors.
In defense applications, Dymola's real-time simulation capabilities support hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) testing, validating control systems and fault detection mechanisms by interfacing models with physical hardware for mission-critical reliability. An example is the modeling of flight control laws and sensor fusion for autonomous systems, where multi-domain integration allows simulation of sensor data processing alongside nonlinear aerodynamics and multi-body mechanics to ensure robust operation in contested environments. These features, built on Modelica's acausal modeling paradigm, enable scalable, interdisciplinary simulations that reduce development risks in aerospace and defense projects.

Energy and Utilities

Dymola facilitates the modeling and simulation of renewable energy systems, including wind turbines and solar photovoltaic plants, by integrating mechanical, electrical, and control components through its Modelica-based environment. For instance, wind turbine models in Dymola capture aerodynamic forces, generator dynamics, and grid integration, enabling analysis of power output under varying wind conditions. Similarly, solar plant simulations incorporate photovoltaic panel efficiency, inverter operations, and environmental factors to evaluate energy yield. These capabilities support utilities in designing scalable renewable installations that align with grid requirements.
In power grid applications, Dymola enables simulation of transmission and distribution networks, including AC/DC converters and electro-mechanical phenomena, to assess stability and fault responses in large-scale systems. Thermal processes in utilities, such as steam cycles in power plants, are modeled using libraries like ThermoSysPro, which handle fluid dynamics and heat transfer for accurate representation of boiler and turbine operations. These models allow engineers to predict performance in combined electrical and thermal environments, essential for utility infrastructure planning.
Dymola's applications in this sector optimize energy efficiency by simulating hybrid systems, such as combined heat and power (CHP) units, where waste heat recovery is integrated with electricity generation to improve overall system performance. Benefits include reduced operational costs and enhanced CO savings through parametric studies that balance fuel consumption against output, as demonstrated in models evaluating CHP plant dynamics under varying loads. Integration of renewables into hybrid setups further supports utilities in achieving higher efficiency. As of 2025, enhancements like the Sustainable Supply Systems library facilitate advanced hybrid energy modeling, including battery storage for smart grids.
A practical example is the simulation of district heating networks in Dymola, where models account for pipe heat losses, pressure drops, and consumer demands to optimize pump operations and temperature control across urban scales. Another is battery storage integration in smart grids, where Dymola models lithium-ion batteries alongside grid components to analyze charge-discharge cycles, peak shaving, and self-consumption in residential or utility settings, ensuring stable power delivery during intermittent renewable inputs. These examples highlight Dymola's role in prototyping energy infrastructure that minimizes downtime and maximizes reliability.
Domain-specific challenges in energy and utilities modeling with Dymola involve managing large-scale systems that transition between steady-state operations and transient events, particularly in fluid and thermal domains where multi-phase flows and heat exchangers introduce computational complexity. Dymola addresses this through equation-based modeling that efficiently solves coupled differential equations, allowing simulations of entire networks with thousands of components while capturing rapid changes like load fluctuations or valve closures. Hierarchical modeling approaches in Dymola further aid in scaling these simulations without sacrificing detail.

Industrial Equipment

Dymola facilitates the modeling and simulation of industrial machinery and processes, particularly in domains involving robotics, manufacturing lines, hydraulic systems, and process automation equipment. In robotics, it supports the development of detailed dynamic models for industrial robots, enabling real-time simulation and control integration to optimize motion trajectories and payload handling. For instance, researchers at the German Aerospace Center (DLR) utilized Dymola to create a high-fidelity model of an industrial robot arm, simulating its kinematics and dynamics in real-time for hardware-in-the-loop testing with actual robot controllers. Hydraulic systems in heavy machinery, such as excavators and presses, benefit from Dymola's libraries for electro-hydraulic components, allowing engineers to model fluid dynamics, valve behaviors, and actuator responses to predict system performance under varying loads.
Manufacturing lines and process automation equipment are simulated using Dymola's multi-domain capabilities, integrating mechanical structures with control logic to analyze production workflows. A notable application involves the modeling of machining centers, akin to CNC machines, where interactions between structural vibrations, spindle drives, and tool paths are captured to enhance precision and reduce downtime. This approach extends to conveyor systems through multi-body dynamics libraries, simulating belt tensions, motor drives, and material flow to ensure seamless integration in assembly lines. Dymola's support for co-simulation via the Functional Mock-up Interface (FMI) enables the coupling of mechanical wear modelsaccounting for friction and material degradationwith electrical drive systems, critical for heavy industry applications like mining equipment or automated factories.
Key benefits of Dymola in industrial equipment design include predictive maintenance via fault simulation, where virtual models replicate component failures like hydraulic leaks or motor overloads to forecast maintenance needs and prevent unplanned outages. Design optimization for productivity is achieved through parametric studies and multi-objective algorithms, allowing engineers to refine equipment configurations for energy efficiency and throughput, as demonstrated in robotic work cell layouts that minimize cycle times while maximizing reach. These capabilities leverage Dymola's Modelica-based environment for reusable component libraries, promoting faster iteration in industrial development cycles.

Modeling and Simulation Features

Model Design Tools

Dymola provides a graphical modeling environment that facilitates the creation of complex, hierarchical models through an intuitive drag-and-drop interface. Users can assemble components from pre-built libraries directly onto a diagram layer, where connections between components are established visually using mouse-based tools, including snapping to gridlines and options for orthogonal (Manhattanized) routing to maintain clean diagrams. This editor supports multiple layers, such as the diagram layer for structural composition and the icon layer for customizable visual representations, enabling the development of reusable model components across engineering domains.
In addition to graphical modeling, Dymola includes an integrated textual editor for direct manipulation of Modelica code, allowing users to define equations, declarations, and algorithms at a low level. The editor features syntax highlighting, undo/redo functionality, and find/replace capabilities to streamline debugging and refinement of model logic, with support for scripting in Modelica files (*.mos) for batch operations. This dual graphical-textual approach accommodates both high-level system assembly and detailed equation-based customization, leveraging Modelica's declarative syntax for acausal modeling.
Library management in Dymola is handled through a dedicated package browser that displays hierarchical structures of Modelica libraries, such as the Modelica Standard Library, in tree or icon views for easy navigation and component selection. Users can customize libraries by creating new packages, extending existing ones, and integrating modern version control systems like Git via built-in commands, including support for downloading and installing libraries from GitHub as of the 2025x release; legacy systems such as CVS or SVN are also supported. This ensures collaborative development and maintainability of model repositories. Encryption options are available for protecting proprietary libraries, adhering to standardized Modelica practices.
Design aids enhance model usability and integrity, including annotation tools for adding graphics like lines, shapes, text, and bitmaps to diagrams and icons, with dynamic elements such as %name placeholders for automatic labeling. Parameterization is supported through interactive dialog boxes that allow setting and propagating values, expressions, and redeclarations across model hierarchies, including enhancements as of 2025x for variable-length parameter arrays and direct modification of package constants. Pre-simulation validation is integrated via the Edit/Check function, which performs syntactic and semantic error detection, checks for undefined references, and verifies equation consistency to catch issues early in the design process.
As of the 2025x release, additional modeling enhancements include improved parameter management and better overall support for Git version control, facilitating more efficient collaborative workflows.

Simulation Engine

Dymola's simulation engine serves as the core computational backbone for executing Modelica-based models of dynamic systems, enabling the numerical solution of complex multi-domain interactions across mechanical, electrical, thermal, and other physical domains. It leverages symbolic processing to convert declarative Modelica equations into optimized imperative C code, facilitating efficient handling of systems described at the differential-algebraic equation (DAE) level. This approach reduces the index of DAEs through structural analysis and tearing, minimizing computational overhead while preserving model fidelity. The engine supports both ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and higher-index DAEs, making it suitable for simulating stiff and non-stiff systems with algebraic constraints. As of 2025x, the engine includes faster simulation of Modelica functions and a new FMI co-simulation technology for improved performance.
Key to its capabilities are advanced solver types tailored for variable-step integration. Dymola incorporates the DOPRI5 integrator, which employs an explicit Runge-Kutta method of order 5(4) with adaptive step-size control based on embedded error estimation, ideal for non-stiff problems requiring high accuracy. For stiff systems and hybrid DAEs, it utilizes the IDA solver from the SUNDIALS suite, implementing a variable-order, variable-step backward differentiation formula (BDF) method that excels in resolving algebraic loops and state events. These solvers enable robust simulation of models with varying dynamics, automatically adjusting step sizes to balance precision and efficiency.
The engine adeptly manages hybrid systems by integrating continuous-time dynamics with discrete events, including support for state machines and zero-crossing detection. Eventssuch as time-based triggers, state-dependent conditions (e.g., when a variable crosses a threshold), and input changesare identified during translation and resolved iteratively during simulation; the variable-step solver refines steps to pinpoint exact event times where expressions equal zero, ensuring consistent state transitions without overshooting. This hybrid handling is crucial for models involving switches, contacts, or mode changes, as in multi-body mechanics or control systems.
Performance enhancements include built-in parallel computing support, allowing distributed execution across multi-core processors or networked machines to accelerate large-scale simulations, such as parameter sweeps or real-time hardware-in-the-loop testing. Dymola also generates Functional Mock-up Units (FMUs) compliant with the FMI standard for co-simulation, enabling seamless integration with external tools while maintaining model encapsulation and scalability for systems exceeding thousands of components. A typical workflow begins with translating the Modelica model into C code via symbolic manipulation, followed by compilation into an executable using platform-specific tools; simulation then proceeds with the selected solver, culminating in automatic result export for visualization and plotting through integrated graphical interfaces.

Optimization and Analysis Tools

Dymola provides built-in optimization capabilities to enhance system performance by solving nonlinear programming problems, often employing the IPOPT solver for interior-point methods in design optimization tasks such as minimizing energy consumption in dynamic models. These tools allow users to define objective functions and constraints directly within Modelica models, enabling automated exploration of parameter spaces to achieve optimal configurations for multi-domain systems. For instance, in automotive applications, optimization can target fuel efficiency by adjusting component parameters while respecting physical limits. As of the 2025x Refresh 1 release (April 2025), the parameter optimization user interface has been simplified for easier use.
Parameter identification in Dymola facilitates model calibration by fitting parameters to experimental data through nonlinear least-squares methods, implemented via the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm in the Dymola Design library. This approach solves the optimization problem formulated as minimizing the sum of squared residuals between simulated outputs $ y_{\text{sim}} $ and measured data $ y_{\text{data}} $:
mini=1N(ysim(,ti)ydata(ti))2
\min_{\theta} \sum_{i=1}^{N} (y_{\text{sim}}(\theta, t_i) - y_{\text{data}}(t_i))^2
mini=1N(ysim(,ti)ydata(ti))2
where $ \theta $ represents the parameter vector, and $ N $ is the number of data points. The Levenberg-Marquardt method iteratively approximates the Jacobian of the residuals, blending gradient descent and Gauss-Newton steps for robust convergence, particularly effective for overdetermined systems with noisy data. To derive this, start with the nonlinear least-squares objective, compute the Jacobian $ J $ of residuals $ r(\theta) = y_{\text{sim}}(\theta) - y_{\text{data}} $, and update $ \theta $ via $ (J^T J + \lambda I) \Delta \theta = -J^T r $, where $ \lambda $ damps the step size; convergence is achieved when residuals fall below a tolerance. This technique is applied post-simulation, using results from the simulation engine to initialize fits for real-world validation.
Analysis features in Dymola include sensitivity analysis to quantify parameter impacts on outputs, supporting both local methods via finite differences and global approaches like Sobol indices through Monte Carlo sampling or Latin Hypercube methods, available since the 2025x Refresh 1 release (April 2025). These tools run parameter sweeps in parallel across CPU cores, generating variance-based indices such as the first-order Sobol index $ S_i = \frac{\text{Var}(E)}{\text{Var}(Y)} $, which isolates individual parameter effects, and total-order index $ S_{T_i} = 1 - \frac{\text{Var}(E)}{\text{Var}(Y)} $, capturing interactions; for example, in a thermal model, capacitance might yield $ S_1 = 0.71 $ and $ S_T = 0.89 $, indicating dominant influence. As of 2025x Refresh 1, enhancements include box plots for observed variables and improved random number generation for these analyses. Linearization tools compute state-space representations around operating points for control design, enabling eigenvalue analysis and stability checks essential for feedback systems. Additionally, animation capabilities visualize multi-body dynamics post-simulation, rendering 3D trajectories of mechanical components to aid qualitative verification. Enhanced Monte-Carlo simulations were added in the 2025x Refresh 1 release to support more robust uncertainty analysis.

Interoperability and Integration

Code and Model Export

Dymola enables the export of Modelica-based models into various formats to facilitate integration with external simulation environments and deployment on hardware platforms. This includes generating Functional Mock-up Units (FMUs) for standardized model exchange, as well as source code in C or C++ for embedded applications. These export mechanisms support seamless interoperability without requiring a full Dymola license on the target system, provided appropriate export options are enabled.
Key export formats encompass C/C++ code generation tailored for real-time and embedded systems, S-functions compatible with MATLAB/Simulink, and FMUs adhering to the Functional Mock-up Interface (FMI) standard. The C/C++ export produces compilable source code that can be integrated into custom applications or microcontrollers, often leveraging supported compilers such as recent versions of Visual Studio (e.g., 2022) on Windows or GCC 11.2.1 or later on Linux, as of the 2025x release. S-function exports allow Modelica models to be wrapped as blocks within Simulink workflows, enabling hybrid simulations where Dymola models interact with Simulink components. FMU exports support both model exchangewhere an external solver handles integrationand co-simulation, where each FMU manages its own solver for coupled subsystem simulations.
Dymola's adherence to FMI standards ensures broad compatibility across tools from different vendors. It supports FMI 2.0 and 3.0, with the latter's support introduced in limited form in the 2024x release, incorporating advanced features such as event mode co-simulation, intermediate updates, early return mechanisms, and variable step-size handling. Support for FMI 3.0 was further enhanced in Dymola 2025x Refresh 1 (April 2025), providing more comprehensive feature implementation. FMI 3.0 also supports terminals and icons for enhanced graphical representation in importing tools, along with solvers like IDA from the SUNDIALS library for FMU generation. This compliance allows Dymola-exported models to interoperate with environments like MATLAB/Simulink or multibody dynamics software such as Adams, promoting vendor-independent model reuse in complex system simulations.
Common use cases for these exports include hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) testing on platforms like dSPACE or xPC Target, where real-time C/C++ code ensures deterministic execution for control system validation. In embedded deployments, exported code runs on resource-constrained microcontrollers for applications in automotive or industrial automation, bypassing the need for the full simulation environment. Binary model exports provide a lightweight alternative for sharing protected models that require minimal runtime overhead.
The export process involves automatic translation of Modelica models into the target format via Dymola's compiler, which handles equation-based descriptions, solver configurations, and interface definitions. Users select export options through the graphical interface, specifying parameters like solver type (e.g., fixed-step for real-time) and code optimization levels; the resulting artifacts include necessary headers, source files, and documentation for integration. This compilation leverages the underlying Modelica semantics, ensuring fidelity to the original model behavior while adapting to platform-specific requirements.

Software Integrations

Dymola, as part of the Dassault Systmes CATIA portfolio, features native integration with CATIA for importing geometric data from CAD models, enabling engineers to incorporate detailed 3D designs directly into Modelica-based system simulations. This seamless connection supports the transition from geometric modeling to behavioral analysis, allowing for the evaluation of mechanical structures within broader multi-domain environments. Additionally, Dymola integrates with the 3DEXPERIENCE platform to facilitate product lifecycle management (PLM) data exchange, where simulation models and results can be shared across collaborative workflows for version control and team-based optimization.
For third-party software, Dymola provides links to MATLAB and Simulink through S-function exports, which embed Modelica models as reusable blocks in Simulink for hybrid simulations involving control systems and signal processing. Co-simulation with ANSYS for finite element analysis (FEA) is achieved via the Functional Mock-up Interface (FMI) standard, permitting the coupling of structural mechanics models from ANSYS with Dymola's dynamic system simulations to analyze interactions like fluid-structure or thermal-mechanical behaviors. Furthermore, Dymola supports Python scripting for task automation, including model parameterization, batch simulations, and result processing, through a dedicated interface that allows direct command execution and data manipulation.
In practice, these integrations enable workflows such as importing CATIA-generated CAD models into Dymola to simulate full vehicle dynamics or exporting Dymola subsystems to Simulink for controller design and hardware-in-the-loop testing. For instance, a mechanical engineer might import a CATIA assembly for multibody simulation in Dymola, then couple it with an ANSYS FEA model via FMI to assess stress under operational loads.
The 2025 release of Dymola (2025x) introduces enhancements to its APIs and scripting capabilities, improving automation through better parameter management and Git integration for versioned model exchanges, which support bidirectional data flows in multi-tool environments by streamlining updates between Dymola and connected platforms like Python or 3DEXPERIENCE. These updates facilitate more efficient scripting for iterative design processes and enhanced interoperability in distributed teams.

Cloud and Collaborative Features

Dymola integrates with the 3DEXPERIENCE platform, enabling deployment of models for remote simulation runs on the cloud, which leverages scalable computing resources and high-performance infrastructure without requiring significant local hardware investments. This cloud-based approach allows users to execute complex multi-domain simulations directly through applications like the System Simulation and Design (SID) app, providing access to advanced processing capabilities for tasks such as multi-physics modeling and optimization.
The Collaborative Designer for Dymola facilitates team-based development by supporting shared libraries, multi-user model editing, and real-time co-simulation sessions within the 3DEXPERIENCE ecosystem. Version control is enhanced through integration with systems like Git, SVN, and CVS, allowing teams to manage Modelica models, track changes, and download libraries from repositories such as GitHub, thereby streamlining collaborative workflows across distributed engineering teams.
These features reduce dependency on on-site resources, enable global access for geographically dispersed teams, and integrate with Dassault Systmes' cloud-based Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) tools to support end-to-end model lifecycle management, including secure data sharing and real-time collaboration. Benefits include automatic software updates, 24/7 mobile accessibility, and energy-efficient cloud operations that consume approximately 30% less power than traditional on-premise servers.
In recent updates up to 2025, Dymola 2025x has introduced improved Git integration for more robust version control in collaborative environments and enhanced support for hybrid on-premise and cloud workflows, allowing seamless transitions between local and remote simulations. Additionally, security measures have been strengthened with multi-layer data encryption and 24-hour intrusion monitoring on the 3DEXPERIENCE cloud, ensuring protection for shared models and sensitive engineering data.

References

Dymola - System Dynamics Model | CATIA - Dassault Systmes

Abstract: Dymola - Ethz

Modelica - ITEA4

 Modelica Language, Libraries, Tools, Workshop and EU Project ...

1 Introduction Modelica Language Specification version 3.7-dev

 Modelica Language Specification version 3.5

Learning the Modelica Language

 AN OVERVIEW OF THE MODELING LANGUAGE MODELICA

 INTRODUCTION TO MODELICA & MODELON IMPACT

The Dymola Compilation Process in Action - Claytex Tech Blog

Efficient Simulation of Hybrid Control Systems in Modelica/Dymola

 Dynamic Selection of States in Dymola. Modelica Workshop 2000 ...

A Structured Model Language for Large Continuous Systems

 Modelica Evolution From My Perspective - LiU Electronic Press

 DYMOLA - A Structured Model Language for Large Continuous ...

5. Activity 1.1: Modelica IEA EBC Annex 60

 AN INTERNATIONAL EFFORT TO DESIGN THE NEXT ... - MODELICA

 Modelica A Language for Physical System Modeling ...

 Modeling in Engineering - Automatic control (LTH)

RealSim - Dynasim - IDA.LiU.SE

 A Unified Object-Oriented Language for Physical Systems Modeling

Dassault Systmes Presents CATIA Systems

Dymola Latest Release | CATIA - Dassault Systemes

None

 The Jet Propulsion Library: Modeling and simulation of aircraft engines

Modelica Industry Solutions | CATIA - Dassault Systmes

 UAV Dynamics and Electric Power System Modeling ... - RPI ECSE

None

Modelling a Wind Turbine in Dymola - Claytex

A case study of multi-energy complementary systems for the building ...

 Hybrid Energy System Modeling in Modelica

 Flexible AC/DC Grids in Dymola/ Modelica

PowerGrids - A Modelica library for electro-mechanical modelling of ...

Complete dynamic model on Dymola - ResearchGate

Establishment of a Model for a Combined Heat and Power Plant with ...

CATIA DYMOLA: System Modeling - 3DS Blog

Dynamic Simulation of District Heating Networks in Dymola | Lund ...

 Dynamic Simulation of District Heating Networks in Dymola

Dynamic Simulation of District Heating Networks in Dymola

 Case Study Real-time Simulation of Industrial Robots with Dymola

 MODELING OF HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS FOR HARDWARE-IN-THE ...

 MODELLING AND SIMULATION OF A MACHINING CENTER WITH ...

Energy-optimal layout design of robotic work cells - ScienceDirect.com

 WHAT IS DYMOLA?

 Dymola User's Manual - Ethz

 Dymola Release Notes - Dassault Systemes

 Collocation Methods for Optimization in a Modelica Environment

Dymola Model Design Tools | CATIA - Dassault Systmes

 New Equation-based Method for Parameter and State Estimation

 Calibration of Static Models using Dymola - Modelica

Exploring Global Sensitivity Analysis in Dymola - Claytex

Stability Analysis in Dymola Part 3 - Claytex

Dymola Basics: 7. Animation - Claytex

Functional Mockup Interface: Dymola Modelica | CATIA

Exporting Models & Licensing - Claytex

Co-simulation with Ansys LS-DYNA Software using Functional Mock ...

Dymola-Simulink interface - Claytex

Interfacing Dymola with Python - Claytex

CATIA Dymola Licensing Options - TriMech Enterprise Solutions

Collaborative Designer for Dymola - Dassault Systmes

Dymola - System Dynamics Modeling Software - TECHNIA

Business Using 3DEXPERIENCE On Cloud - VIAS3D
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion