Dynamic-link library Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Dynamic-link library
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A dynamic-link library (DLL) is a module that contains functions and data that can be used by another module, such as an application or another DLL, enabling dynamic loading and linking at runtime in Microsoft Windows operating systems.
DLLs promote code modularity by allowing developers to separate reusable components from the main application, facilitating easier maintenance, updates, and distribution of shared functionality without recompiling the entire program. They reduce system memory usage through code sharing, where multiple applications can load the same DLL instance into memory simultaneously, conserving resources compared to static linking where each application includes its own copy of the code.
The Windows API itself is implemented as a collection of DLLs, such as kernel32.dll for core system services, user32.dll for user interface functions, and gdi32.dll for graphics operations, making them essential for native Windows development. DLLs support both explicit and implicit linking: implicit linking resolves dependencies at compile time via import libraries, while explicit linking uses runtime functions like LoadLibrary and GetProcAddress for on-demand loading, offering flexibility for plugins and conditional code execution. DLLs were first introduced with Windows 1.0 in November 1985 and subsequently adopted in OS/2 version 1.0 in December 1987 during the joint Microsoft-IBM development, evolving into a cornerstone of Windows architecture by the 1990s.

Introduction

Definition and Purpose

A dynamic-link library (DLL) is a modular executable file format that contains code, data, and resources, enabling multiple programs to access and share the same functions and elements simultaneously without embedding duplicates in each application's binary. This design promotes efficiency by treating the DLL as a reusable component within the Windows operating system ecosystem.
The primary purposes of DLLs revolve around enhancing software development and performance: they facilitate code reusability by allowing developers to centralize common functionalities in a single library, thereby reducing the overall size of executable files; they support centralized updates, where modifications to the shared code propagate across all dependent applications without recompiling them; and they improve memory efficiency by loading the library once into a shared address space, where it can be accessed by multiple processes concurrently.
DLLs exhibit key characteristics that distinguish them as runtime-loadable modules, including dynamic loading at application startup or during execution rather than at compile time, which enables late binding and greater modularity in program design. Unlike static libraries, which integrate code directly into the executable during linking, DLLs defer resolution until runtime, allowing for more adaptable and resource-efficient software architectures.

History and Development

The origins of dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) trace back to the development of OS/2, a collaborative operating system between IBM and Microsoft. OS/2 1.0, released in December 1987, introduced dynamic linking as a core feature, allowing programs to share code and resources at runtime through dynamic-link libraries, which supported multi-threading and modular application design in a 16-bit protected-mode environment. This concept laid the groundwork for shared libraries in subsequent Microsoft systems. DLLs were then formalized in the Windows ecosystem with the release of Windows 3.0 on May 22, 1990, where they served 16-bit applications by enabling code reusability and reducing memory usage through dynamic loading, marking a shift from static linking prevalent in earlier Windows versions. In Windows 3.0, DLL exports were handled via segmented addressing, with functions resolved at load time to support the growing complexity of graphical user interfaces.
The evolution advanced significantly with the advent of 32-bit computing in Windows NT 3.1, released in July 1993, which adopted the Portable Executable (PE) file format for both executables and DLLs. This format enabled true shared libraries by providing a structured layout for imports, exports, and relocations, facilitating efficient memory mapping and process isolation in a multiprocessor environment. The PE format's design, derived from the Common Object File Format (COFF), allowed DLLs to be loaded as shared sections across processes, addressing limitations of 16-bit DLLs and supporting the NT kernel's emphasis on stability and security. During the mid-1990s, DLLs became integral to the Component Object Model (COM), introduced in 1993 as part of OLE 2.0, where they housed implementation code for reusable, language-agnostic objects, promoting object-oriented extensibility in applications like Microsoft Office.
Key milestones in the 2000s addressed versioning and compatibility challenges known as "DLL hell." Windows XP, launched in October 2001, introduced side-by-side (SxS) assemblies, permitting multiple DLL versions to coexist in isolated directories via XML manifest files, which specified dependencies and resolved conflicts without overwriting system files. This mechanism, stored in the WinSxS folder, enhanced application reliability by activating specific assembly versions at runtime. Windows Vista, released in January 2007, built on this with refined manifest handling, including embedded manifests for better compatibility shimming and support for trusted libraries through code signing and User Account Control (UAC) integration, reducing unauthorized DLL substitutions. Released on April 25, 2005, Windows XP Professional x64 Edition extended DLL support to 64-bit architectures, requiring separate 64-bit DLLs for native applications while maintaining WoW64 emulation for 32-bit compatibility, thus broadening hardware utilization on AMD64 processors.
In modern contexts, DLLs retain relevance in Universal Windows Platform (UWP) applications introduced with Windows 10 in July 2015. UWP apps package DLLs within .appx or .msix bundles, ensuring self-contained deployment, sandboxing, and automatic versioning without global system impacts, aligning with the shift toward app store distribution and cross-device consistency. In Windows 11, released in 2021, DLLs continue to support legacy Win32 applications, with enhanced security through features like Virtualization-Based Security (VBS), though Microsoft encourages migration to packaged formats like MSIX for new development. This packaging model isolates dependencies, mitigating traditional DLL conflicts while supporting native Win32 DLLs through extensions like the Desktop Bridge.

Core Mechanics

Dynamic vs. Static Linking

In static linking, the object code from library files is copied directly into the executable during the build process, creating a self-contained binary that includes all required functionality. This method eliminates the need for external library files at runtime, ensuring the program operates without dependencies on shared components. As a result, statically linked executables are more portable and less prone to issues arising from missing or altered libraries, but they tend to be larger in size due to the inclusion of duplicate code if the same library is used across multiple applications.
Dynamic linking, by comparison, postpones the incorporation of library code until execution time. Instead of embedding the code, the executable stores references (imports) to functions in external dynamic-link libraries (DLLs), which the operating system loads into memory and binds to the program as needed. This enables multiple processes to share a single instance of a DLL, conserving memory and allowing for smaller executable sizes, while also permitting libraries to be updated independently of applications. However, it introduces runtime overhead for loading and resolution, and potential compatibility issues if DLL versions mismatch across components.
Static linking prioritizes reliability and simplicity in deployment by avoiding external dependencies, though it can lead to code bloat and complicates library maintenance, as updates require recompiling dependent programs. Dynamic linking offers modularity, reusability, and easier versioningfacilitating system-wide updates without rebuilding executablesbut risks "DLL hell," where conflicting library versions disrupt functionality, and demands careful management of dependencies. Overall, static linking suits scenarios requiring isolation, such as embedded systems, while dynamic linking is preferred for shared environments like Windows applications to optimize resource use.
In the Windows operating system, dynamic linking is initiated by the loader subsystem, which parses the executable's import table, maps required DLLs into the process's virtual address space, and resolves symbolic references. The ntdll.dll module provides the native API layer for these operations, exporting low-level functions like LdrLoadDll that the loader uses to handle DLL loading, dependency resolution, and binding without direct user intervention.

Loading Process

The loading process of a dynamic-link library (DLL) in Windows begins during application initialization or upon an explicit call to the LoadLibrary function, where the operating system's loader, primarily handled by components such as ntdll.dll and kernel32.dll, maps the DLL file from disk into the virtual address space of the calling process. This mapping occurs by reading the DLL's Portable Executable (PE) format file, starting with the DOS header to locate the PE header, which provides essential metadata including the preferred base address, section alignments, and directories for imports and exports.
Once the PE file is opened, the loader performs dependency resolution by recursively examining the import table in the PE data directories to identify and load any required dependent DLLs before proceeding with the primary DLL. For instance, system DLLs like kernel32.dll are typically loaded first in the dependency chain to ensure foundational APIs are available, with the loader searching for these dependencies according to the standard DLL search order, which includes the application's directory, the current working directory, the system directory, the 16-bit system directory, the Windows directory, and the directories listed in the PATH environment variable. This recursive process continues until all dependencies are resolved and loaded, preventing circular dependencies through built-in checks in the loader.
After dependencies are loaded, the DLL is allocated into the process's address space, with the read-only sectionssuch as code and constant datamapped as shared pages across processes to promote memory efficiency, while writable segments like the data section are allocated privately per process to avoid conflicts. If the preferred base address specified in the PE optional header is unavailable due to address space fragmentation or conflicts with other modules, the loader applies relocations from the DLL's .reloc section to adjust internal pointers to the actual loaded address, ensuring compatibility without requiring recompilation. The PE headers' export table is parsed to make the DLL's functions accessible, though actual binding occurs later.
Upon successful loading, the loader invokes the DLL's entry point, DllMain, with the DLL_PROCESS_ATTACH reason code to allow initialization, and returns an HMODULE handle representing the base address of the loaded module to the caller. If the loading failsdue to reasons such as file not found, access denied, or unresolved dependenciesthe function returns NULL, and the caller can retrieve detailed error information via GetLastError. This mechanism differs from static linking, where libraries are incorporated directly into the executable at compile time without runtime loading.

Symbol Resolution and Binding

In the Windows Portable Executable (PE) format, an executable file maintains an import table that enumerates the external symbolssuch as functions and datait requires from dynamic-link libraries (DLLs), leaving these references initially unresolved to enable dynamic linking. Conversely, each DLL includes an export table that catalogs the symbols it provides for import by other modules, specifying their names, ordinals, and relative virtual addresses (RVAs). This structure allows the operating system loader to match imports against exports during the loading process, facilitating modular code sharing without embedding full copies of library code in every executable.
The Windows PE loader performs symbol resolution by first mapping all dependent DLLs into the process address space, then traversing the import table to locate corresponding entries in each DLL's export table. For efficiency, the loader uses hint tables generated during the linking phase; these provide suggested ordinal values or name prefixes to accelerate the search through potentially large export directories, avoiding exhaustive linear scans. Resolution can occur by name, where the full symbol string is compared, or by ordinal, a numeric identifier that enables faster lookup but requires precise matching to avoid errors if ordinals change between DLL versions. Once matched, the loader updates the Import Address Table (IAT)a runtime-modifiable array in the executablewith the actual memory addresses of the exported symbols, effectively binding them for subsequent calls.
Binding in DLL symbol resolution typically happens as early binding at load time, the default mechanism where the PE loader resolves and fixes all imports before transferring control to the executable's entry point, ensuring immediate availability of library functions. This contrasts with late binding, performed at runtime on demand, often via explicit calls to functions like LoadLibrary and GetProcAddress, which defer resolution until a specific symbol is first accessed and allow for conditional or version-specific loading. Early binding optimizes startup performance by precomputing addresses but can introduce overhead if unused imports are resolved unnecessarily.
To mitigate potential address conflicts during bindingwhere multiple DLLs claim the same preferred base address in the process spacerebasing relocates DLL images to non-overlapping locations using relocation tables in the PE format. The REBASE tool from the Microsoft Visual Studio suite scans and adjusts base addresses in DLLs to prevent such collisions, reducing load-time relocation fixes that could otherwise degrade performance. Although Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR) has diminished the need for manual rebasing by randomizing load addresses, it remains relevant for legacy or non-ASLR-aware modules.
For finer control over binding timing, the Microsoft Visual C++ (MSVC) linker supports delayed binding through the /DELAYLOAD flag, which specifies DLLs to load only upon the first invocation of their functions, rather than at process startup. This injects helper code that intercepts import calls, performs on-demand resolution via the IAT, and supports optional unloading to conserve memory for infrequently used libraries. Delayed binding enhances startup speed and resource efficiency, particularly in large applications with optional dependencies, while still leveraging the standard export-import matching process.

Implementation Details

Import Libraries

Import libraries are static library files, typically with a .lib extension, that serve as stubs containing symbol definitions and metadata for functions and data exported by a dynamic-link library (DLL). These stubs allow the linker to resolve references during compilation without embedding the actual DLL code, instead generating import thunksshort code sequences that facilitate calls to the DLL's exports via the Import Address Table (IAT) in the executable. The IAT entries are populated at runtime when the operating system loads the DLL and binds the actual function addresses.
In the build process, the compiler and linker reference the import library to validate symbol signatures, perform type checking, and support development tools like IntelliSense, all without needing the DLL file present. This results in an executable with IAT entries pointing to the DLL's exports, while the DLL provides the runtime implementation; if the DLL is unavailable at load time, the application fails to start. Such preparation ensures efficient compile-time development while deferring full resolution to runtime.
These libraries are created using the Microsoft LIB utility, often from a module-definition (.def) file that enumerates the DLL's exports, via the /DEF option, which also generates an accompanying export file (.exp) for the DLL build. Applications can handle missing DLL functions gracefully through delay-loading mechanisms where imports are resolved only on first use. Unlike export files, which define what a DLL exposes during its own build, import libraries are distributed to consumers for linking against the DLL's interface.

Explicit Runtime Linking

Explicit runtime linking enables applications to programmatically load dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) and retrieve the addresses of their exported functions during execution, providing greater control compared to implicit linking mechanisms. This approach, also referred to as run-time dynamic linking, is facilitated by key Win32 API functions that allow developers to manage DLL loading and unloading explicitly. Introduced as part of the Win32 API, it supports flexible integration of DLLs without requiring them to be resolved at load time.
The process begins with calling LoadLibrary or LoadLibraryEx to load the DLL into the process's address space, which returns a handle of type HMODULE if successful; this handle serves as a reference to the loaded module and increments its reference count. Developers then use GetProcAddress with the HMODULE and the name (or ordinal) of an exported function to obtain a pointer to that function, which is cast to the appropriate function pointer type for invocation. Once the DLL is no longer needed, FreeLibrary is invoked with the HMODULE to decrement the reference count and unload the module if the count reaches zero. If a full path is not provided to LoadLibrary, the system searches for the DLL according to the safe DLL search order (enabled by default since Windows XP), which includes mechanisms such as DLL redirection, API sets, side-by-side manifest redirection, the loaded modules list, known DLLs, and (as of Windows 11 version 21H2) the package dependency graph, followed by the application directory, the system directory (such as C:\Windows\System32), the 16-bit system directory, the Windows directory, the current working directory, and finally the PATH environment variable. This order prioritizes secure locations to reduce risks like DLL hijacking.
Common use cases for explicit runtime linking include conditional loading, where an application can detect and handle missing DLLs by providing alternatives or prompting the user, plugin systems that dynamically load extension modules for extensibility, and scenarios where startup dependencies must be avoided to improve launch performance or compatibility. Unlike implicit linking through import libraries, which resolves symbols automatically at process startup, explicit linking allows runtime decisions on whether and how to use a DLL.
Error handling is essential in this process, as LoadLibrary returns NULL on failure, at which point GetLastError should be called to retrieve the specific error code; for instance, error code 126 (ERROR_MOD_NOT_FOUND) indicates that the specified module could not be located. Similarly, GetProcAddress returns NULL if the function is not found in the DLL, with GetLastError providing details such as error code 127 (ERROR_PROC_NOT_FOUND). These diagnostics enable robust application behavior in the face of loading issues.

Delayed Loading

Delayed loading is a technique in Microsoft Visual Studio's C++ compiler that defers the loading of dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) until the first call to a function within them, rather than at application startup. This is achieved through the linker flag /DELAYLOAD, which generates proxy functions (thunks) for the imported symbols; these proxies invoke the Windows API functions LoadLibrary and GetProcAddress only when the function is first accessed.
The primary benefit of delayed loading is improved application startup time, as it avoids loading DLLs that may never be used during execution, thereby reducing initial memory footprint and initialization overhead. If a delayed DLL is not referenced, it is entirely ignored, and with the optional /DELAY:UNLOAD flag, the DLL can be automatically unloaded once no longer needed, further optimizing resource usage.
Implementation relies on the Delay Load Helper library (delayimp.lib), which provides the runtime function __delayLoadHelper2 to handle the loading process. This helper checks if the DLL is already loaded, performs the load if necessary, resolves the function address, and manages error handling; developers can customize this behavior by overriding the helper or providing a custom import address table.
This feature was introduced in Visual Studio 6.0, released in 1998, as a significant enhancement for managing DLL dependencies in larger applications.
However, delayed loading introduces a small performance overhead on the first call to a function in the DLL due to the runtime loading and symbol resolution steps, and it is not ideal for DLLs that contain critical initialization code or are required immediately at startup.

Advantages

Modularity and Reusability

Dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) enable modularity by encapsulating specific functionalities, such as user interface controls or algorithms, into separate modules that can be developed, tested, and maintained independently from the main application. This separation allows developers to focus on discrete components without affecting the entire program, facilitating larger-scale software projects that incorporate multiple language modules or third-party contributions.
Reusability is a core benefit of DLLs, as a single library can be shared across multiple executable files (EXEs), eliminating code duplication and promoting efficient resource utilization. For instance, user32.dll provides essential Windows API functions for user interface elements like windows and menus, which are invoked by numerous applications simultaneously, thereby standardizing common operations without redundant implementation in each program.
The shared loading mechanism of DLLs further enhances efficiency by minimizing disk space requirements and reducing memory footprint in environments with multiple running applications, as the operating system loads the library once and maps it into each process's address space. This approach not only conserves resources but also supports plugin architectures, where applications dynamically load DLL-based extensions to add features without recompiling the core software, as demonstrated in extensible systems like those using virtual interface pointers for plug-in integration.

Upgradability and Versioning

One key advantage of dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) is their upgradability, which enables developers to update shared code by simply replacing the DLL file on the system without requiring recompilation or relinking of dependent applications. This process leverages the dynamic loading mechanism, where the operating system loader resolves exports at runtime, allowing seamless substitution of the binary as long as the interface remains compatible. Since DLLs are typically shared across multiple applications and users on the same system, such updates can have a global effect, propagating improvements, bug fixes, or security patches to all consumers simultaneously.
Versioning in DLLs presents challenges primarily centered on maintaining backward compatibility to prevent disruptions in existing applications. Developers must ensure consistency in exported functions, data structures, and behaviors across versions, often by adhering to rules such as not altering the ordinal or name of existing exports and avoiding changes to their signatures. To address these issues, manifestsXML files embedded in or accompanying the DLLfacilitate side-by-side deployment, allowing multiple versions of the same DLL to coexist on the system, with applications binding to specific versions via app-local copies placed in the application's directory rather than relying on global system-wide installations.
Windows Installer has supported DLL versioning through side-by-side assembly management since Windows 2000, enabling installers to deploy and activate specific versions without overwriting others. This capability is extended in .NET assemblies via strong naming, which assigns a unique identity to each assembly using its name, version number, public key, and optional culture, ensuring precise binding and preventing version conflicts during updates.
To mitigate versioning conflicts further, strategies such as registration-free COM allow COM components within DLLs to be activated without registry entries, using manifests to specify dependencies and versions locally. Similarly, private assemblies in .NET confine DLLs to the application's scope, avoiding interference with system-wide versions and enabling isolated updates. Features such as AppLocker (introduced in 2009 with Windows 7) and Windows Defender Application Control (introduced in 2017 with Windows 10) enhance secure replacements by enforcing policies on DLL execution, such as requiring digital signatures or publisher verification to block unauthorized or tampered updates during deployment.

Limitations and Challenges

DLL Hell

DLL Hell refers to a set of complications in Microsoft Windows systems where multiple applications depend on different versions of the same dynamic-link library (DLL), resulting in conflicts when one application's installer overwrites the shared DLL in the system directory, causing other applications to crash or behave unexpectedly due to incompatibility. This issue arose primarily because DLLs were globally registered and stored in a common system folder, such as \Windows\System32 or \Windows\System, with no built-in mechanism for version-specific isolation or rollback, allowing newer installations to replace older files without ensuring backward compatibility. In pre-Windows XP environments, the operating system loaded only the single available version of a DLL for all processes, exacerbating the risk of system-wide failures from even minor updates.
The phenomenon was especially acute during the Windows 9x era in the 1990s, when consumer-oriented operating systems like Windows 95 and 98 lacked robust file protection, leading to widespread instability as users installed multiple applications that shared common runtime libraries, such as Visual Basic controls or C++ redistributables. For instance, the installation of Internet Explorer 4 in 1997 often overwrote critical system DLLs like comctl32.dll, disrupting applications that depended on prior versions and contributing to broader user complaints about software reliability. The term "DLL Hell" was coined in January 1998 by technology columnist Brian Livingston in a critique of Windows 98's ongoing dependency issues, highlighting how such conflicts turned routine software updates into sources of frustration and data loss.
Although Microsoft introduced partial mitigations like System File Protection in Windows 98 Second Edition (1999) to safeguard core DLLs, the core problem persisted until Windows XP (2001) implemented side-by-side assemblies for version coexistence. As of 2025, DLL Hell has been largely resolved in contemporary Windows versions through advanced assembly management and the Global Assembly Cache in .NET, but it continues to affect legacy systems running unpatched Windows 9x or NT environments, where maintaining compatible DLL versions remains challenging without modern tools. Solutions involving improved versioning and isolation have since become standard, reducing the incidence of such conflicts in new deployments.

Shared Memory and Address Space Issues

In a Windows process, all loaded dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) share the same virtual address space, which can lead to conflicts if their preferred base addresses overlap. When such a conflict occurs, the operating system must relocate one or more DLLs to available memory regions, adjusting internal pointers and references within the affected modules. This relocation process introduces performance overhead, as it requires scanning and updating the DLL's relocation table during loading, potentially fragmenting the address space and complicating future allocations.
The consequences of these address space issues extend beyond mere overhead. If a DLL lacks proper relocation information or contains incompatible code assuming a fixed base address, relocation can result in crashes or undefined behavior, such as invalid memory accesses or corrupted data structures. Additionally, the shared address space enables global state pollution, where static variables or global data in one DLL can unintentionally interfere with those in another, leading to race conditions or erroneous computations if multiple DLLs modify overlapping resources without coordination.
Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR), introduced in Windows Vista in 2007, mitigates some of these issues by randomizing the base addresses of DLLs and the executable at process startup, reducing the likelihood of predictable overlaps and aiding in space utilization. However, ASLR does not fully eliminate conflicts, as address space fragmentation can still force relocations, and legacy DLLs without ASLR support may exacerbate problems.
These challenges are particularly acute in 32-bit processes, which are limited to a 2 GB user-mode virtual address space (expandable to 3 GB with specific configurations), making overlaps and fragmentation more probable compared to 64-bit processes that support vastly larger address ranges. In contrast, 64-bit environments alleviate many such constraints, though shared state risks persist regardless of architecture.

Security Risks Including Hijacking

Dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) are susceptible to security risks stemming from their dynamic loading mechanism, particularly DLL hijacking, where attackers exploit the Windows DLL search order to load malicious code. In this attack, an adversary places a malicious DLL with the same name as a legitimate one in a directory that the application searches early in the loading process, such as the current working directory, causing the application to execute the attacker's code instead of the intended library. This vulnerability arises because applications often load DLLs without specifying fully qualified paths, allowing Windows to search multiple locations in a predefined order.
The DLL search order vulnerability has been documented since 2009, notably in Microsoft Security Bulletin MS09-015, which addressed flaws in the SearchPath function that could enable privilege escalation through manipulated DLL loading. To partially mitigate this, Microsoft introduced SafeDLLSearchMode in Windows 2000 Service Pack 4 in 2003, which rearranges the search order to prioritize system directories (like the Windows system folder) over potentially untrusted locations such as the current directory, reducing the risk of loading malicious files from user-writable paths. This mode has been enabled by default since Windows XP Service Pack 2 in 2004.
Other risks include buffer overflows in DLL export functions, where poorly implemented entry points can be exploited for arbitrary code execution when invoked by calling applications, potentially leading to remote code execution if the DLL is network-accessible. Additionally, unsigned DLLs are vulnerable to injection attacks, as applications may load them without verification, allowing attackers to substitute tampered versions that evade basic integrity checks.
Key mitigations involve code signing DLLs with Authenticode, Microsoft's digital signature technology, which verifies the publisher and integrity of the library before loading, preventing execution of unsigned or altered files. Application manifests can specify trusted DLL paths or side-by-side assemblies, redirecting loads to secure locations and avoiding ambiguous search orders. Since Windows Vista in 2007, User Account Control (UAC) has added prompts for elevated privileges, limiting the impact of hijacked DLLs by restricting administrative access unless explicitly granted.
In the modern context of 2025, these risks remain relevant for legacy applications that do not implement path specifications or signing, particularly in enterprise environments supporting older software. For instance, in January 2024, security researchers disclosed a new variant of DLL search order hijacking that exploits the trusted WinSxS folder to bypass mitigations in Windows 10 and 11 by targeting vulnerable system binaries without requiring elevated privileges. Tools such as Microsoft's Process Monitor can identify vulnerable DLL loads by logging search attempts, enabling developers to audit and harden applications against unsafe loading behaviors.

Language and Compiler Considerations

C and C++

In C and C++, dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) are typically created and managed using Microsoft Visual C++ (MSVC) tools, where exports are defined to make functions, data, or classes available to client applications. To export symbols from a DLL, developers use the __declspec(dllexport) storage-class attribute applied to declarations in source or header files, which instructs the compiler to mark those symbols for export in the resulting DLL. Alternatively, a module-definition (.def) file can specify exports, including by ordinal values for performance or compatibility reasons, providing a text-based way to control the export table without modifying source code. When building the DLL with the MSVC compiler from the command line, the /LD option compiles the source files and links them into a DLL, using the multithreaded DLL runtime library by default. The MSVC linker automatically generates an import library (.lib file) from the exported symbols during this process, enabling implicit linking in client applications.
For consuming DLLs in C and C++ applications, implicit linking involves declaring imported symbols with __declspec(dllimport) in header files provided by the DLL author, followed by linking against the generated import library. This can be automated in source code using the #pragma comment(lib, "dllname.lib") directive, which instructs the linker to include the specified import library without manual project configuration. In contrast, explicit linking loads the DLL at runtime using the Windows API function LoadLibrary from kernel32.dll, allowing dynamic resolution of exports via GetProcAddress for greater flexibility in loading paths or conditional usage.
C++ introduces specific considerations due to its support for features like name mangling, where the compiler decorates symbol names to encode type information, resulting in exported functions having altered names (e.g., with prefixes and suffixes) that must match exactly between DLL and client for linking to succeed. To ensure compatibility, especially when interfacing with C code or non-mangled exports, the extern "C" linkage specification is used on exported functions, disabling mangling and producing standard C-style names. For more complex C++ DLLs requiring binary-stable interfaces across compiler versions or modules, the Component Object Model (COM) is commonly employed, structuring exports as COM objects with standardized vtables to abstract away mangling and ABI differences.
Templates in C++ pose challenges for DLL export because they are compile-time constructs instantiated per translation unit, preventing direct export of the template itself from a DLL; instead, template definitions are typically placed in headers for inline instantiation in clients, or explicit template instantiations can be exported as concrete symbols if shared implementation is needed.

Visual Basic

In Visual Basic 6.0 (VB6) and Visual Basic for Applications (VBA), dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) are typically accessed through implicit linking via the Declare statement, placed at the module level to reference external procedures. This declaration provides the necessary details, including the DLL library name via the Lib clause, the procedure name, argument types and passing conventions (such as ByVal or ByRef), and the return data type, allowing developers to invoke DLL functions directly within VB code as if they were native procedures. The Declare statement supports aliases through the optional Alias clause to map VB-friendly names to the actual exported names in the DLL, and it can reference procedures by ordinal number rather than string name for performance gains in scenarios where ordinals are documented. If the targeted DLL is unavailable at runtime, implicit linking results in errors like runtime error 53 ("File not found") or failure to load the module, potentially crashing the application during startup.
VB6 imposes notable limitations on DLL creation and usage, as it natively supports only ActiveX DLL projects, which produce COM-compliant libraries rather than standard, non-COM DLLs; for the latter, developers must use companion languages like C++ to build the DLL and then declare its functions in VB6. This COM-centric approach ties VB6 DLLs closely to the Component Object Model (COM), where Type Libraries (TLB files)binary files embedding metadata about classes, interfaces, methods, and propertiesfacilitate discovery, late binding, and automation. ActiveX controls, frequently packaged as DLLs, serve as wrappers for reusable UI elements and business logic, leveraging these TLBs for seamless integration in VB6 forms and applications without requiring explicit function declarations. Runtime dependencies on these DLLs can lead to deployment issues if registration via tools like regsvr32 fails or if version mismatches occur.
For scenarios requiring runtime flexibility, such as conditional loading based on user input or error recovery, VB6 supports explicit linking by declaring Windows API functions like LoadLibrary to dynamically load a DLL and obtain a module handle, followed by GetProcAddress to resolve function addresses into callable pointers. This method bypasses startup-time binding but introduces complexity, as VB6's variant data types and lack of native pointer arithmetic demand careful manual marshalling, increasing the risk of memory leaks or type mismatches without the safeguards of lower-level languages. Explicit linking is particularly useful for optional DLLs but remains error-prone in VB6 due to its high-level abstractions.
The transition to VB.NET with the .NET Framework 1.0 in 2002 marked a significant evolution, introducing Platform Invoke (P/Invoke) as the primary mechanism for interoperating with unmanaged DLLs from managed code. P/Invoke declarations, using the <DllImport> attribute, enable calling external functions with automatic data marshalling between managed and unmanaged types, enhanced exception handling, and support for both standard Win32 DLLs and COM objects via interop assemblies. This approach addresses many VB6 limitations by providing type safety, garbage collection for resources, and better performance isolation, though it still requires careful attribute configuration for complex structures or callbacks.

Delphi

In Delphi, which uses the Object Pascal language, dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) are created by initiating a project with the library keyword instead of program, defining a module that can be dynamically loaded by applications. The structure includes a uses clause for dependencies, followed by procedure and function declarations, and concludes with an exports clause listing the routines to be made available externally, such as exports ProcedureName, FunctionName;. This clause can specify aliases or index numbers for exports, enabling compatibility with other languages. For interoperability, exported routines typically use the stdcall calling convention, which aligns with Windows API standards, though cdecl is also supported. Initialization code executes upon loading, allowing setup tasks like registering callbacks via DllProc.
To use an external DLL in a Delphi application, procedures or functions are declared in a unit with the external directive specifying the DLL name, such as procedure ExternalProc; external 'MyDLL.dll';. This enables implicit linking at load time, with calling conventions like stdcall or cdecl explicitly stated if not using the default register. For explicit runtime loading, the Windows unit provides equivalents to Win32 APIs: LoadLibrary to load the DLL by path, returning a handle, and GetProcAddress to retrieve procedure addresses for dynamic invocation. Dynamic binding then uses the @ operator or procedural types to call these addresses, allowing conditional loading based on runtime conditions.
Delphi extends standard DLL functionality through packages, which are specialized DLLs with the .bpl (Borland Package Library) extension, introduced in Delphi 2 in 1996 to support 32-bit Windows development. These enable runtime linking via LoadPackage and UnloadPackage from the SysUtils unit, facilitating modular code distribution beyond simple procedural exports. A key advantage of DLL handling in Delphi stems from Object Pascal's strong static typing, which enforces type safety in external declarations and reduces interface errors during linking or calls. Additionally, many Visual Component Library (VCL) components are distributed as DLLs or packages, promoting reusability in graphical applications while maintaining compile-time checks.

Programming Examples

Implicit Linking with Imports

Implicit linking with imports enables an application to access functions and data from a dynamic-link library (DLL) by resolving references at compile time through an import library, allowing direct calls to the DLL's exports as if they were part of the executable itself. This approach uses an import library (.lib file), which contains stub code and metadata about the DLL's exports, to embed references into the executable's portable executable (PE) format during linking. The import library mechanics ensure that the linker generates an import table in the executable, specifying the DLL and the ordinals or names of the required functions.
In a typical scenario, consider importing the MessageBoxA function from the system DLL user32.dll in a C++ application. The developer includes the <windows.h> header, which declares MessageBoxA as an external function, and links against user32.libthe import library for user32.dll. The code can then invoke MessageBoxA directly, such as MessageBoxA(NULL, TEXT("Hello"), TEXT("Title"), MB_OK);, without runtime resolution code.
The build process involves specifying the import library in the project settings or linker command line, such as using /link user32.lib in Microsoft Visual C++ (MSVC). At runtime, the Windows loader automatically loads the DLL when the executable starts, resolves the actual addresses of the imported functions from the DLL's export table, and populates the executable's Import Address Table (IAT) with these addresses, enabling seamless execution. If the DLL is absent, a required export is missing, or version incompatibilities arise, the loader fails at load time, typically resulting in an error like "The specified module could not be found" or a system dialog prompting for the missing file.
This method is particularly suitable for core dependencies that are always required by the application, such as standard Windows API libraries, as it simplifies development and ensures immediate availability without additional runtime checks.

Explicit Linking in C

Explicit linking in C, also referred to as run-time dynamic linking, enables a program to load a dynamic-link library (DLL) at execution time rather than at compile time or load time. This method uses the LoadLibrary or LoadLibraryEx function to obtain a module handle for the DLL, followed by GetProcAddress to retrieve the address of an exported function within that DLL. The approach offers flexibility, such as loading DLLs conditionally based on runtime conditions or delaying loading until a specific function is needed, which can optimize memory usage and handle missing DLLs gracefully.
To implement explicit linking, the program must include the <windows.h> header, which declares the required Win32 API functions from libloaderapi.h. The process begins by calling LoadLibrary with the DLL's path or name; on success, it returns an HMODULE handle, which is invalid (NULL) on failure, prompting error retrieval via GetLastError. With the handle, GetProcAddress is invoked using the function's name (as a null-terminated string) or ordinal value to obtain a function pointer, which is cast to the appropriate type for invocation; failure here also sets the last error code. After use, FreeLibrary decrements the DLL's reference count and unloads it if zero, ensuring proper resource cleanup.
A representative example demonstrates loading the system DLL kernel32.dll and retrieving the GetTickCount function, which returns the milliseconds elapsed since system start. The code snippet below includes error checking:
#include <windows.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
 HMODULE hKernel32 = LoadLibraryA("kernel32.dll");
 if (hKernel32 == NULL) {
 DWORD error = GetLastError();
 printf("LoadLibrary failed with error %d\n", error);
 return 1;
 }

 typedef DWORD (WINAPI *GetTickCountFunc)();
 GetTickCountFunc pGetTickCount = (GetTickCountFunc)GetProcAddress(hKernel32, "GetTickCount");
 if (pGetTickCount == NULL) {
 DWORD error = GetLastError();
 printf("GetProcAddress failed with error %d\n", error);
 FreeLibrary(hKernel32);
 return 1;
 }

 DWORD ticks = pGetTickCount();
 printf("Milliseconds since start: %u\n", ticks);

 if (!FreeLibrary(hKernel32)) {
 DWORD error = GetLastError();
 printf("FreeLibrary failed with error %d\n", error);
 }

 return 0;
}
This example uses LoadLibraryA for ANSI strings and defines a function pointer type matching GetTickCount's signature (DWORD WINAPI GetTickCount(void)). The WINAPI calling convention ensures compatibility with the exported function.
For compilation, Microsoft Visual C++ (MSVC) can build the program with the command cl program.c, as kernel32.dll functions like LoadLibrary and GetProcAddress are available via the default system libraries. Using GCC with MinGW-w64, compile via gcc program.c -o program.exe, with no additional linking flags required for kernel32.dll access, though -lkernel32 may be specified explicitly if needed. Both compilers link against the Windows SDK, ensuring the Win32 APIs are resolved at runtime for explicit loading.

Explicit Linking in Python

Explicit linking in Python is facilitated by the ctypes module, a standard library component that enables calling functions in dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) or shared libraries through a foreign function interface, providing C-compatible data types without requiring compilation of extension modules. Introduced in Python 2.5 in 2006, ctypes allows Python scripts to dynamically load and interact with DLLs at runtime, supporting cross-language access for tasks like interfacing with Windows APIs or third-party C libraries. This approach contrasts with implicit linking by offering flexible, on-demand loading without embedding dependencies in the Python interpreter.
To load a DLL explicitly, import ctypes and use library loaders such as cdll.LoadLibrary(path), which returns a library object from which functions can be accessed as attributes. For example:
from ctypes import cdll
lib = cdll.LoadLibrary("example.dll")
func = lib.function_name
result = func(arg) # Call the function with appropriate (/page/Argument)s
The cdll loader assumes the CDECL calling convention, common for Unix-like shared libraries, while on Windows, windll and WinDLL are used for STDCALL conventions typical in Win32 APIs; windll automatically converts Python strings to byte or Unicode strings as needed, whereas WinDLL requires explicit handling to avoid mismatches. To ensure type safety and prevent errors from incorrect argument passing, specify function prototypes using argtypes for input parameters and restype for the return type, leveraging ctypes primitives like c_int, c_char_p, or c_wchar_p. For instance:
from ctypes import cdll, c_int, c_char_p
lib.function.argtypes = 
lib.function.restype = c_int
Failure to load a DLL, such as due to a missing file or dependent module, raises an OSError exception; common cases include The specified module could not be found when a required DLL is absent.
A practical example involves loading the Windows user32.dll to display a Unicode message box via MessageBoxW, which requires wide-character strings for internationalization:
from ctypes import windll, c_wchar_p
user32 = windll.user32
user32.MessageBoxW.argtypes = 
user32.MessageBoxW.restype = c_int
result = user32.MessageBoxW(None, "Hello, World!", "Title", 0)
This code loads the system DLL, defines the function signature to handle Unicode pointers and an integer flag (0 for OK button only), and invokes it to show a modal dialog, returning the user's response code. Such explicit linking enables Python applications to leverage existing DLL functionality seamlessly while maintaining script portability.

Related Technologies

Component Object Model Integration

Dynamic-link libraries (DLLs) serve as in-process servers for the Component Object Model (COM), enabling the hosting of COM objects that can be instantiated by clients through the CoCreateInstance function, which loads the DLL and retrieves an interface pointer to the requested object based on its class identifier (CLSID). This approach allows COM components to execute within the client's process space, providing efficient access to object functionality without the overhead of inter-process communication.
To enable discovery and instantiation, COM DLLs must export specific entry-point functions, including DllRegisterServer for creating registry entries that map CLSIDs to the DLL path and DllUnregisterServer for removing those entries, typically invoked via the regsvr32 utility. These functions ensure that the operating system can locate and load the DLL during CoCreateInstance calls, facilitating seamless integration of reusable components across applications.
The integration leverages COM's interface-based architecture, where objects expose contracts through immutable interfaces identified by unique interface identifiers (IIDs), promoting version tolerance by allowing new functionality via additional interfaces without altering existing ones. Universally unique identifiers (UUIDs), used for CLSIDs and IIDs, prevent naming conflicts and ensure global uniqueness, enhancing reliability in distributed environments. This design supports binary compatibility and extensibility, making DLL-hosted COM objects suitable for long-term software evolution.
Object Linking and Embedding (OLE), an early precursor to full COM standardization, utilized DLLs for embedding and linking components starting with OLE 1.0 in 1990, laying the groundwork for modular Windows applications in the 1990s. To streamline development, the Active Template Library (ATL), introduced by Microsoft in 1996, provides template-based C++ classes that simplify the creation of lightweight COM DLLs by automating boilerplate code for interfaces and registration.
In modern contexts, DLL-based COM objects can interoperate with .NET applications through the Runtime Callable Wrapper (RCW), introduced in the .NET Framework 1.0 in 2002, which acts as a proxy to marshal calls between managed code and unmanaged COM components hosted in DLLs.

Cross-Platform Equivalents

In Unix-like operating systems such as Linux, the equivalent to Windows Dynamic-link Libraries (DLLs) are shared object files, typically with the .so extension. These files enable runtime linking, where libraries are loaded dynamically into a process using functions like dlopen() to open the library and obtain a handle, and dlsym() to retrieve the address of specific symbols or functions within it. This mechanism supports modular code reuse and delayed loading, similar to DLLs, but operates within the Executable and Linkable Format (ELF) standard rather than the Portable Executable (PE) format used by DLLs.
On macOS, dynamic libraries are implemented as .dylib files, managed by the dyld dynamic loader, which handles loading and linking at runtime. These libraries often integrate with frameworks, which bundle the .dylib along with headers, resources, and metadata to facilitate sharing across applications while promoting versioned and encapsulated distribution. Like DLLs, .dylibs allow for code sharing to reduce memory usage and enable updates without recompiling dependent executables, though they adhere to the Mach-O executable format and leverage Darwin's POSIX-based APIs.
Key differences arise from platform-specific architectures: DLLs are intrinsically bound to the PE format and the Win32 API for loading via functions like LoadLibrary() and GetProcAddress(), whereas .so files rely on ELF and POSIX standards, and .dylibs use Mach-O with dyld-specific behaviors. This ties DLLs closely to Windows' ecosystem, creating cross-compilation challenges; for example, generating .so files for Linux requires platform-specific toolchains like GCC configured for ELF output, often necessitating separate build environments.
The introduction of .NET Core in 2016 marked a shift toward cross-platform compatibility, enabling assembliesfunctional equivalents to DLLsto be developed and deployed across Windows, Linux, and macOS without platform-specific recompilation. This blurs traditional boundaries by allowing a single library binary to function similarly on multiple operating systems through runtime abstraction.
For porting DLL-based code to Unix-like systems, tools like Cygwin provide a POSIX emulation layer on Windows, facilitating the recompilation of Windows applications into Unix-compatible formats by translating Win32 calls to POSIX equivalents during development. This approach emulates DLL behaviors in a Unix-like context on Windows, easing the transition to native .so or .dylib builds on target platforms.

References

Dynamic-Link Libraries (Dynamic-Link Libraries) - Win32 apps

Editor's Note: 20 Years and Still Going Strong! | Microsoft Learn

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/dlls-in-visual-cpp

About Dynamic-Link Libraries - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

OS/2 1.0

How were DLL functions exported in 16-bit Windows?

PE Format - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Microsoft Visual C++ 2005 Service Pack 1 Redistributable Package ...

Microsoft Component Object Model (COM) - UMD Computer Science

About Side-by-Side Assemblies - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

Application manifests - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Microsoft Security Bulletin MS05-048 - Critical

Packaging apps - UWP applications - Microsoft Learn

Advantages of Dynamic Linking - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

 An Evil Copy: How the Loader Betrays You - Mathias Payer

Dynamic-link library redirection - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Dynamic-link library search order - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

What Goes On Inside Windows 2000: Solving the Mysteries of the ...

Inside Windows: Win32 Portable Executable File Format in Detail

DllMain entry point (Process.h) - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

Load-Time Dynamic Linking - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Exporting from a DLL | Microsoft Learn

An In-Depth Look into the Win32 Portable Executable File Format ...

What is DLL import hinting? - The Old New Thing

EXPORTS - Microsoft Learn

What is DLL import binding? - The Old New Thing

UNDER THE HOOD | Microsoft Learn

How important is it nowadays to ensure that all my DLLs have non ...

/DELAYLOAD (Delay Load Import) | Microsoft Learn

Linker support for delay-loaded DLLs | Microsoft Learn

Walkthrough: Create and use your own dynamic-link library (C++)

Using an Import Library and Export File - Microsoft Learn

Working with Import Libraries and Export Files | Microsoft Learn

Link an executable to a DLL - Microsoft Learn

LoadLibraryA function (libloaderapi.h) - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

GetProcAddress function (libloaderapi.h) - Win32 apps

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/libloaderapi/nf-libloaderapi-freelibrary

Run-Time Dynamic Linking - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

: Win32 Error Codes - Microsoft Learn

/DELAY (Delay load import settings) | Microsoft Learn

Understand the delay load helper function | Microsoft Learn

Under the Hood, MSJ December 1998 - Jacob Filipp

Dynamic link library (DLL) - Windows Client - Microsoft Learn

C++ at Work: Writing, Loading, and Accessing Plug-Ins

Dynamic-Link Library Updates - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Guidelines for Creating Side-by-side Assemblies - Win32 apps

Strong naming and .NET libraries - Microsoft Learn

Strong-named assemblies - .NET - Microsoft Learn

Registration-Free COM Interop - .NET Framework - Microsoft Learn

Creating Registration-Free COM Objects - Win32 apps

Working with AppLocker rules - Microsoft Learn

Avoiding DLL Hell: Introducing Application Metadata in the Microsoft ...

DLL Hell: Software Dependencies, Failure, and the Maintenance of ...

DLL Hell: Software Dependencies, Failure, and the Maintenance of ...

Windows XP: Escape from DLL Hell with Custom Debugging and ...

A fine detail on how DLLs are relocated as the result of a base ...

GNAT User's Guide: Microsoft Windows Topics

Dynamic-Link Library Data - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

DYNAMICBASE (Use address space layout randomization)

Six Facts about Address Space Layout Randomization on Windows

Memory Limits for Windows and Windows Server Releases

Virtual Address Space (Memory Management) - Win32 apps

Dynamic-Link Library Security - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

Triaging a DLL planting vulnerability - Microsoft

Microsoft Security Bulletin MS07-015 - Critical

Manifests - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Exporting from a DLL Using __declspec(dllexport - Microsoft Learn

Exporting from a DLL Using DEF Files - Microsoft Learn

/MD, /MT, /LD (Use runtime library) | Microsoft Learn

Import into an application using __declspec(dllimport - Microsoft Learn

comment pragma | Microsoft Learn

dllexport, dllimport | Microsoft Learn

The extern "C" specifier disables C++ mangling, but that doesn't ...

The COM Library - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Templates (C++) - Microsoft Learn

Declare statement (VBA) | Microsoft Learn

Visual Basic 6.0 Documentation - Microsoft Learn

Contents of a Type Library | Microsoft Learn

Platform Invoke (P/Invoke) - .NET - Microsoft Learn

Writing Dynamically Loaded Libraries - RAD Studio

Procedures and Functions (Delphi) - RAD Studio

Libraries and Packages (Delphi) - RAD Studio - Embarcadero DocWiki

None

How to Create and Use DLLs in Delphi - ThoughtCo

MessageBoxA function (winuser.h) - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

The Import Address Table is now write-protected, and what that ...

ctypes A foreign function library for ... - Python documentation

Ctypes SciPy Cookbook documentation - Read the Docs

CoCreateInstance function (combaseapi.h) - Win32 apps

Classes and Servers - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

The Component Object Model - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

DllRegisterServer function (olectl.h) - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

DllUnregisterServer function (olectl.h) - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Self-Registration - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

COM Technical Overview - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) - CIO Wiki

Active Template Library (ATL) Concepts | Microsoft Learn

Runtime Callable Wrapper - .NET - Microsoft Learn

dlopen(3) - Linux manual page - man7.org

dlsym(3) - Linux manual page - man7.org

SQL Server on Linux: ELF and PE Images Just Work

Dynamic Library Usage Guidelines - Apple Developer

Using Dynamic Libraries - Apple Developer

Cross-compiling from Linux to Windows with MinGW - Conan docs

NET Core - .NET Goes Cross-Platform with .NET Core

Building and Using DLLs - Cygwin
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion