Evaluation function Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Evaluation function
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 An evaluation function in artificial intelligence is a heuristic that estimates the expected utility or relative desirability of a state in a search problem, particularly in adversarial games like chess, where it approximates the value of non-terminal positions when full exploration of the game tree is computationally infeasible.
Pioneered by Claude Shannon in his 1950 paper on programming computers to play chess, the function assesses long-term advantages and disadvantages of a position, such as material balance and positional control, to guide algorithms like minimax in selecting moves.
Typically formulated as a linear combination of board featuresEval(s) = wf(s) + wf(s) + + wf(s), where f represent quantifiable attributes (e.g., number of pieces or center control) and w are weights derived from expert knowledge or machine learningit enables efficient depth-limited search by treating cutoff nodes as pseudo-terminals.
In practice, a strong evaluation function must be both computationally efficient and highly correlated with actual winning probabilities, often incorporating domain-specific heuristics like piece values (pawn = 1, queen = 9) or mobility metrics to outperform opponents in complex games.
Its effectiveness has been central to advancements in game AI, from early programs to modern systems, where tuning via self-play or reinforcement learning refines weights to better predict outcomes.

Fundamentals

Definition

An evaluation function is a static heuristic function employed in artificial intelligence for game-playing programs to assign a numerical score to a given game state or position, approximating its desirability or strength from the perspective of a specific player. This score serves as an estimate of the expected outcome under optimal play, guiding decision-making when exhaustive search of the game tree is infeasible due to computational limits. In essence, it provides a quick assessment of position quality without simulating all possible future moves, relying on domain-specific features to differentiate between favorable and unfavorable states.
Mathematically, an evaluation function can be represented as eval(s)v\text{eval}(s) \mapsto veval(s)v, where sss denotes the game state (or position) and vvv is a scalar value indicating the estimated advantage. In zero-sum two-player games, vvv typically ranges from negative infinity (certain loss for the current player) to positive infinity (certain win), with values centered around 0 representing approximate equality, such as a draw or balanced positions. For terminal positions, eval(s)\text{eval}(s)eval(s) exactly matches the game's outcome: + or +1 for a win, - or -1 for a loss, and 0 for a draw, aligning with standard game theory utilities.
Key assumptions underlying evaluation functions include their heuristic nature, which compensates for incomplete information about future game developments by approximating the minimax value of a position. They are designed to be independent of search depth, providing a consistent static assessment regardless of how deeply the game tree is explored, though their accuracy improves when applied closer to terminal states. This approach presupposes familiarity with basic game theory concepts, such as the ternary outcomes of win, loss, and draw in perfect-information games.
The concept of the evaluation function originated in the context of early AI game programs during the 1950s, notably in the work of Herbert Simon, Allen Newell, and J.C. Shaw on chess and checkers programs at RAND Corporation and Carnegie Mellon University. Their 1958 paper described evaluation routines that numerically scored board positions based on material and positional factors, marking a foundational step in using heuristics for complex problem-solving in games. These early efforts integrated evaluation functions with search algorithms like minimax to enable practical gameplay on limited hardware.

Role in Adversarial Search

In adversarial search algorithms for two-player zero-sum games, evaluation functions approximate the utility of positions at leaf nodes of the game tree, where exhaustive search to terminal states becomes infeasible owing to the exponential explosion caused by high branching factorsoften exceeding 30 in complex gamesand the need for depths of 10 or more plies to capture meaningful strategy. This depth-limited approach treats non-terminal positions at the cutoff horizon as pseudo-terminals, applying the evaluation to estimate long-term prospects and avoid the "horizon effect" where important future developments are overlooked.
The integration with the minimax algorithm is foundational: the evaluation function provides static estimates for non-terminal cutoff positions, enabling recursive value propagation up the tree. Formally, the minimax value $ v(s) $ for a state $ s $ at depth limit $ d $ is defined as
v(s)={utility(s)ifsisterminalmaxaactions(s)v(result(s,a))ifmaximizingplayerandd>0minaactions(s)v(result(s,a))ifminimizingplayerandd>0eval(s)ifdepthlimitreached
v(s) = 
\begin{cases} 
\text{utility}(s) & \text{if } s \text{ is terminal} \\
\max_{a \in \text{actions}(s)} v(\text{result}(s, a)) & \text{if maximizing player and } d > 0 \\
\min_{a \in \text{actions}(s)} v(\text{result}(s, a)) & \text{if minimizing player and } d > 0 \\
\text{eval}(s) & \text{if depth limit reached}
\end{cases}
v(s)=utility(s)maxaactions(s)v(result(s,a))minaactions(s)v(result(s,a))eval(s)ifsisterminalifmaximizingplayerandd>0ifminimizingplayerandd>0ifdepthlimitreached
with the optimal move selected as the action maximizing (or minimizing) this backed-up value at the root. This substitution allows minimax to approximate optimal play despite incomplete search, as pioneered in early computational game analyses.
Evaluation functions synergize with alpha-beta pruning by supplying scalar scores that tighten the alpha (best max value) and beta (best min value) bounds during search, permitting early cutoff of subtrees proven irrelevant to the root decisionfor instance, if a node's value exceeds beta for a minimizer, all remaining siblings can be pruned. This reduces the effective branching factor from $ b $ to roughly $ \sqrt{b} $ in ordered trees, exponentially accelerating evaluation while preserving minimax optimality.
A central design trade-off arises between evaluation accuracy and computational cost: highly accurate functions, incorporating nuanced features like king safety or pawn structure, demand more processing time per leaf, constraining search depth on limited hardware, whereas simpler linear combinations of material and mobility enable deeper plungesoften 2-4 plies morefor superior tactical insight. Empirical studies confirm that modest accuracy gains can yield disproportionate strength improvements when paired with deeper search.
The role of evaluation functions has evolved from fixed-depth minimax implementations in 1970s programs, which rigidly halted at a preset horizon and relied heavily on eval for all assessments, to modern iterative deepening frameworks starting in the 1980s. These incrementally deepen searches (e.g., 1 ply, then 2, up to time allowance), reusing shallower results to refine move ordering and principal lines while applying evaluations primarily at the deepest leaves, thus mitigating time overruns and enhancing reliability.
Beyond games, evaluation functions generalize to heuristic guidance in non-adversarial optimization, estimating solution quality to steer local search toward global optima in domains like scheduling or circuit design, though their primary impact remains in competitive, zero-sum settings.

Construction Methods

Handcrafted Functions

Handcrafted evaluation functions rely on domain expertise to manually define and weight key features of a game position, forming a heuristic approximation of its value. Experts identify informative attributes, such as material balance (the relative value of captured and remaining pieces) and positional advantages (like control of the board center), then combine them linearly to produce a score that guides search algorithms toward promising moves. This approach typically employs a formula of the form
eval(s)=i=1nwifi(s),
\text{eval}(s) = \sum_{i=1}^{n} w_i \cdot f_i(s),
eval(s)=i=1nwifi(s),
where sss represents the game state, fi(s)f_i(s)fi(s) are normalized feature values (often ranging from -1 to 1 or scaled to piece units), and wiw_iwi are expert-assigned weights reflecting each feature's strategic importance. Early implementations, such as the 1967 Greenblatt chess program (also known as MacHack VI), exemplified this simplicity by primarily using material countsassigning fixed values like 1 for pawns and 9 for queensaugmented with basic positional bonuses for piece development and king safety.
The design process begins with feature selection, where developers choose a set of measurable properties based on game theory and expert analysis, followed by weighting to balance their contributions. Weights are refined iteratively through empirical testing: positions from game databases are evaluated against known outcomes (e.g., wins, losses, or draws), and adjustments are made manually or via optimization techniques like linear regression to minimize prediction errors. For instance, in chess, developers might test thousands of grandmaster games to tune penalties for weaknesses like isolated pawns. Common features include king safety (assessing exposure to attacks), pawn structure (evaluating chains or passed pawns for advancement potential), and mobility (counting legal moves for pieces to quantify activity). This manual process ensures the function captures strategic nuances but requires deep game knowledge.
These functions offer key advantages in interpretabilityexperts can inspect and justify individual termsand computational speed, as they avoid the overhead of data-driven models, enabling real-time evaluation in resource-constrained environments. However, they are inherently limited by human expertise, potentially overlooking subtle patterns or struggling with novel positions outside the designer's experience, making them brittle to evolving strategies. In modern AI, handcrafted functions have been surpassed in strength by learned alternatives, such as those in AlphaZero, which achieved superhuman performance without manual feature engineering, though they persist as baselines or in hybrid systems for their transparency and efficiency.

Learned Functions

Learned evaluation functions in game AI employ machine learning techniques, primarily neural networks, to approximate the value of game states by learning patterns from large datasets of positions and outcomes. These functions are typically trained using supervised learning, where positions are labeled with win/loss/draw outcomes or estimated values from expert play or simulations, or through reinforcement learning methods that update estimates based on temporal differences in rewards. Common architectures include feedforward neural networks for simpler board representations and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for spatial games like Go, which capture local patterns such as piece interactions and board control.
Training paradigms for these functions often involve self-play, where agents generate their own data by simulating games against themselves, producing policy-value networks that simultaneously learn move probabilities and state values. Alternatively, imitation learning from expert human games provides initial supervision, with loss functions combining mean squared error for value prediction and cross-entropy for policy matching, often augmented by regularization terms like L2 penalties to prevent overfitting. In reinforcement learning setups, temporal difference (TD) methods bootstrap value estimates from subsequent states, enabling incremental learning without full game rollouts.
Key advancements trace back to the 1990s with TD-Gammon, which used TD() learning on a feedforward network to master backgammon through self-play, achieving expert-level performance without human knowledge. Post-2010s developments shifted to deep learning, with CNN-based evaluators demonstrating superior pattern recognition in complex games, as seen in early Go applications predicting expert moves at human dan levels. Efficiency improvements came via quantized networks and specialized architectures like efficiently updatable neural networks (NNUE), which enable rapid incremental updates during search by representing inputs as sparse half-keypoint features, reducing computational overhead on CPUs.
These learned functions excel at modeling non-linear interactions among game elements, such as subtle positional trade-offs that handcrafted rules might overlook, leading to more accurate evaluations in high-branching-factor games. However, their black-box nature complicates interpretability and debugging, and training requires substantial computational resources, often involving millions of simulated games on GPU clusters. To mitigate these issues, hybrid approaches integrate learned components with handcrafted features, such as material counts or mobility scores, blending data-driven insights with domain-specific priors for enhanced robustness and faster convergence.
By 2025, learned evaluation functions have achieved widespread adoption in commercial and open-source game engines, powering top-performing systems in chess and shogi through NNUE integrations that rival or exceed traditional methods in strength while maintaining real-time efficiency. Ongoing research explores multimodal inputs, incorporating not just current board states but also move histories or auxiliary data like time controls, to further refine evaluations in dynamic environments.

Exact Evaluation via Tablebases

Exact evaluation via tablebases refers to the use of precomputed databases that provide perfect assessments of win, loss, or draw outcomes for endgame positions in games like chess, limited to configurations with a specific maximum number of pieces on the board. These tablebases are constructed through retrograde analysis, a backward induction technique that exhaustively enumerates all reachable positions from terminal states, determining the optimal result and distance to it for each. For instance, in chess, 7-piece tablebases cover all positions involving up to seven pieces (including kings), storing outcomes such as distance-to-mate (DTM) or distance-to-zeroing (DTZ) metrics.
The construction process employs dynamic programming, originating from Richard Bellman's foundational work on dynamic programming in the 1950s, which applies backward induction to solve subgames iteratively. Starting from terminal positions (e.g., checkmates or stalemates), the algorithm generates predecessor positions via "un-move" generation and classifies them based on the results of their successors, propagating values until all positions up to the piece limit are resolved. Storage is achieved through efficient indexing, such as bijective mappings to Gdel numbers or Zobrist hashing, combined with compression techniques like bit-packing to manage the enormous state space; for example, the Lomonosov 7-piece tablebases, computed in 2012, encompass over 500 trillion positions in approximately 140 TB after compression.
In practice, tablebases are integrated into game engines for lookup during adversarial search, replacing approximate evaluation at leaf nodes with precise values when a position falls within the database's scope, often probed via transposition tables to avoid redundant computations and ensure efficient access even in real-time play. This probing enhances search accuracy without additional computational overhead beyond the initial storage cost.
Scalability is constrained by the combinatorial explosion of positions, making tablebases feasible primarily for endgames where the reduced material limits the state space compared to midgame or opening phases; the full 7-piece chess tablebases were completed in 2012 using the Lomonosov supercomputer at Moscow State University. Advantages include zero evaluation error for covered positions, enabling perfect play and theoretical insights, while disadvantages encompass massive storage requirements and applicability only to shallow depths, beyond which approximate methods must supplement.
Extensions involve real-time probing in modern engines, such as Stockfish or Leela Chess Zero, which access remote or local tablebases during analysis. Ongoing research leverages distributed computing for larger bases; as of 2025, partial 8-piece tablebases have been generated for specific configurations, with efforts like those by Marc Bourzutschky resolving significant subsets to uncover new endgame records; as of August 2025, progress includes the identification of a 400-move winning line in pawnless 8-piece endgames, though a complete set remains computationally prohibitive at estimated petabyte scales.

Applications in Games

In Chess

In chess, evaluation functions assess the relative strength of a position by quantifying advantages in material, positional elements, and strategic factors tailored to the game's tactical and piece-based nature. Standard material values assign 1 point to a pawn, 3 points each to a knight and bishop, 5 points to a rook, and 9 points to a queen, forming the core of most evaluations since these reflect average exchange equivalences derived from extensive game analysis. Beyond material, chess-specific features include penalties for pawn structure weaknesses, such as -0.3 to -0.5 points for isolated or doubled pawns that limit mobility and create vulnerabilities, and king safety metrics like tropism, which penalize positions where enemy pieces exert pressure near the king (e.g., -0.2 points per unprotected square in the king's vicinity). Piece mobility contributes positively, often adding 0.1 points per legal move to reward active development and control.
Piece-square tables enhance positional evaluation by using 2D arraysone for each piece type and colorto assign bonuses or penalties based on board location, reflecting strategic ideals like central control or edge avoidance. For instance, a knight on c3 might receive +0.5 points for its central influence in the midgame, while the same knight on a1 incurs a -0.4 penalty for poor activity; these values are scaled in centipawns (1/100 of a pawn unit) for precision. Modern implementations, such as those in early Stockfish versions, employ tapered tables with separate midgame and endgame variants, interpolating between them based on remaining material (e.g., full midgame weighting at 40+ pieces, shifting to endgame at under 20) to adapt to phase-specific priorities like pawn promotion potential.
Handcrafted evaluation functions in chess engines like pre-NNUE Stockfish combined these features into a linear formula summing material balance, piece-square table scores, and adjustments for structure and safety, tuned via automated testing on millions of positions. A basic pseudocode representation of such an evaluation might look like:
double evaluate(Board board) {
 double score = 0.0;
 // (/page/Material) balance
 score += (board.white_pawns - board.black_pawns) * 100;
 score += (board.white_knights - board.black_knights) * 300;
 // ... similar for other pieces
 // Piece-square tables
 for each piece in board {
 score += pst * (piece.color == WHITE ? 1 : -1);
 }
 // (/page/Pawn_structure) penalties
 score -= isolated_pawn_penalty(board.white_pawns) - isolated_pawn_penalty(board.black_pawns);
 // King safety and mobility
 score += king_safety(board.white_king) - king_safety(board.black_king);
 score += mobility(board.white_pieces) - mobility(board.black_pieces);
 return score / 100.0; // Convert to pawn units
}
This approach, rooted in expert-designed heuristics, provided interpretable but limited accuracy compared to learned methods.
Neural network integrations, particularly NNUE (Efficiently Updatable Neural Network), revolutionized chess evaluation by hybridizing handcrafted speed with learned pattern recognition; Stockfish adopted NNUE in August 2020, using a shallow network with half-KP input features (king-piece pairs) for efficient CPU updates during search. Trained on billions of positions generated from self-play or high-depth searches, NNUE evaluates via a forward pass yielding a score in pawn units, outperforming pure handcrafted evaluation by approximately 90 Elo points in standard time controls. By 2023, Stockfish transitioned to fully neural-based evaluation. As of November 2025, Stockfish 17.1 achieves an Elo rating of approximately 3644 in CCRL benchmarks.
For exact evaluation in endgames, chess engines integrate tablebases, precomputed databases providing perfect outcomes for positions with up to 7 pieces; Syzygy tablebases, released in 2018, cover all such configurations (over 423 trillion positions) and supply metrics like distance-to-mate (DTM) or distance-to-zero (DTZ) moves, enabling seamless probing during search to return precise win/draw/loss probabilities or mate distances (e.g., +5 for a position 5 moves from mate). When applicable, these override heuristic functions, ensuring optimal play in late-game scenarios.
The evolution of chess evaluation functions traces from early hardware-limited systems like Belle in the 1970s, which used basic material and mobility heuristics on dedicated chess machines, to modern neural hybrids. Belle's evaluation emphasized simple piece values and captures, achieving competitive play by 1978. The 2018 launch of Leela Chess Zero introduced AlphaZero-inspired Monte Carlo Tree Search with pure neural evaluation trained via reinforcement learning, surpassing traditional engines in strategic depth. By 2025, NNUE-dominant engines like Stockfish (Elo ~3644) and Leela variants demonstrate 100+ Elo superiority over handcrafted predecessors through scalable neural architectures, blending historical heuristics with data-driven accuracy.

In Go

Evaluation functions in Go must account for the game's unique strategic elements, including territory control, where players aim to enclose empty areas on the 19x19 board; influence, which measures potential control over surrounding points; eye formation, essential for securing group vitality by creating unfillable internal spaces; and ko threats, tactical sequences to recapture positions under superko rules to prevent infinite loops. These aspects integrate with scoring systems, such as Chinese rules that tally enclosed territory plus captured stones, or Japanese rules focusing solely on territory, influencing how programs assess endgame positions.
Traditional handcrafted evaluation functions in early Go programs emphasized local features like liberty counting, which tallies adjacent empty intersections for each group to gauge safety, and shape evaluation distinguishing thick (secure, influential) from thin (vulnerable) formations. These were often linear combinations of weighted terms, manually tuned by professional players to approximate win probabilities. For instance, programs from the 1990s employed such handcrafted approaches, focusing on local tactical assessments.
Neural network advancements revolutionized Go evaluation with AlphaGo in 2016, introducing value networks as deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained via self-play on the full 19x19 board to estimate win probability directly from the position. The value output approximates the sigmoid of the network's prediction: $ v(s) \approx \sigma(NN(s)) $, where $ s $ is the board state and $ \sigma $ is the sigmoid function, providing a scalar between 0 and 1 representing the current player's winning chance. This approach outperformed handcrafted methods by capturing global patterns and long-term strategy without explicit feature engineering.
Modern engines like KataGo, developed from 2018 onward, build on this with enhanced CNN architectures incorporating nested residual blocks for improved efficiency and accuracy in evaluating complex positions, enabling stronger long-term strategic assessment through self-play reinforcement learning. Open-source efforts such as Leela Zero, an implementation of AlphaGo Zero principles, have democratized access, training distributed value networks that rival proprietary systems while emphasizing efficiency for broader adoption. By 2025, ongoing developments aim toward lightweight models integrated with real-time Monte Carlo tree search to facilitate deployment on mobile devices. Post-AlphaGo programs like Fine Art (2024) have achieved superhuman performance, with continued open-source advancements in 2025. These innovations highlight efficiency gains, allowing high-fidelity evaluations on resource-constrained hardware.
Go's immense state space, estimated at approximately $ 10^{170} $ possible positions, renders exact methods like tablebases infeasible and necessitates learned approximations over exhaustive handcrafted rules, as traditional approaches struggle with the game's holistic, pattern-driven complexity.

References

 Artificial Intelligence Chapter 5 - Informed search algorithms

 A Chess-Playing Machine - Paradise

 CS 540 Intro to Artificial Intelligence

3.2 Minimax | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence

 6 ADVERSARIAL SEARCH - Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach

 Games: evaluation functions - CS221 Stanford

 chess-playing programs and the problem - Bitsavers.org

Programming a Computer for Playing Chess

 XXII. Programming a Computer for Playing Chess1

An analysis of alpha-beta pruning - ScienceDirect.com

 Games: evaluation functions Computation Speeding up minimax

Depth-first iterative-deepening: An optimal admissible tree search

 Learning Evaluation Functions for Global Optimization

 Adversarial Search - CS@Cornell

The Greenblatt chess program | Proceedings of the November 14-16 ...

 From Simple Features to Sophisticated Evaluation Functions

 Playing Chess with Limited Look Ahead - arXiv

Move Evaluation in Go Using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks

Temporal difference learning and TD-Gammon - ACM Digital Library

 Efficiently Updatable Neural-Network-based Evaluation Functions ...

NNUE - Chessprogramming wiki

Introducing NNUE Evaluation - Strong open-source chess engine

Origins and Development of NNUE in Chess Engines - beuke.org

Retrograde Analysis - Chessprogramming wiki

About Lomonosov tablebases

https://www.rand.org/pubs/papers/P3013/

Lomonosov Tablebases - Chessprogramming wiki

8-piece endgame tablebases - first findings and interview!

Eight-piece tablebases a progress update and some results

Chess Pieces Value - Chess Terms

Evaluation - Chessprogramming wiki

Piece-Square Tables - Chessprogramming wiki

 Neural Networks for Chess - arXiv

Syzygy endgame tablebases: KvK

32 Best Chess Engines of 2025 | Based On Their Ratings - RankRed

 Counting the Score: Position Evaluation in Computer Go

Nemesis Software: review - British Go Association

 Accelerating Self-Play Learning in Go - arXiv

Computer Go: An AI oriented survey - ScienceDirect.com
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion