Event loop Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 19 days ago 
Event loop
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 In computer programming, an event loop is a fundamental construct in event-driven architectures that enables programs to handle asynchronous events efficiently by continuously monitoring an event queue and dispatching events to their associated handlers. It operates as a central control mechanism, allowing a single-threaded process to remain responsive to inputs like user interactions, network I/O, or timers without blocking execution.
The typical workflow of an event loop involves an infinite loop that polls for pending events, often using system calls such as select, poll, or epoll to detect readiness for I/O operations. When an event arrivesgenerated by hardware interrupts, user actions, or asynchronous tasksit is enqueued, and the loop dequeues it in a first-in, first-out (FIFO) order to invoke the predefined callback or event handler. This design decouples event detection from processing, ensuring that handlers execute briefly to avoid freezing the application, with longer tasks offloaded to separate threads if necessary.
Event loops have been integral to software since the early days of graphical user interfaces, such as in X11 window systems and frameworks like Java Swing or Python's Tkinter, where they manage user interface updates and responsiveness. In modern contexts, they underpin asynchronous programming in languages like JavaScript, powering web browsers and Node.js servers by queuing tasks (macrotasks and microtasks) and executing them non-blockingly to handle concurrency on a single thread. This paradigm enhances scalability for I/O-bound applications, reducing latency in scenarios like network servers or real-time systems.

Fundamentals

Definition and Purpose

An event loop is a fundamental control flow construct in event-driven programming that operates by continuously checking an event queue for incoming eventssuch as user inputs, network data arrivals, or timer expirationsand dispatching each event to an appropriate handler for processing. This mechanism forms the core of the program's execution model, where the loop runs indefinitely until termination, ensuring that events are handled in the order they are received without the program idling unnecessarily.
The primary purpose of an event loop is to facilitate non-blocking execution, allowing programs to remain responsive while managing asynchronous operations efficiently. By integrating with non-blocking I/O interfaces, such as system calls like select() or poll(), the loop avoids busy-waitingwhere a thread repeatedly checks for events without productive workand instead yields control only when necessary, enabling single-threaded concurrency for I/O-bound tasks. This approach is particularly valuable in environments like network servers, where it supports handling multiple concurrent connections without suspending the main thread on prolonged operations like file reads or socket communications.
Key benefits include enhanced scalability for I/O-intensive applications, as the event loop can process a high volume of events in a resource-efficient manner, and the prevention of thread explosion, where multi-threaded alternatives might spawn excessive threads leading to high memory overhead and context-switching costs. In single-threaded setups, it eliminates concurrency bugs like race conditions by serializing event handling, promoting simpler and more predictable program behavior.
A basic pseudocode representation of an event loop illustrates its simplicity:
while (running) {
 event = queue.waitForNextEvent(); // Block until next event arrives
 if (event.isQuit()) {
 break;
 }
 handler = getHandler(event); // Determine appropriate handler
 handler.(/page/Process)(event); // Dispatch and execute
}
This structure highlights how the loop waits for events and invokes handlers, forming the backbone for responsive, event-oriented systems.

Historical Development

The concept of the event loop traces its roots to the 1960s development of time-sharing systems, where interrupt-driven input/output mechanisms enabled multiple users to interact concurrently with a single computer by responding to hardware interrupts rather than polling devices continuously. Systems like Multics, initiated in 1965 as a collaborative project between MIT, Bell Labs, and General Electric, utilized interrupts to manage resource sharing and user inputs efficiently, laying foundational principles for asynchronous event handling in multi-user environments.
A significant milestone occurred in 1973 with the Xerox Alto, the first personal computer to implement a graphical user interface (GUI) driven by user events such as mouse movements and keyboard inputs. The Alto's software architecture featured an event dispatch loop that queued input events and invoked callbacks to update the display, marking the transition from command-line interfaces to interactive, event-responsive computing. This design influenced subsequent GUIs by prioritizing non-blocking responsiveness.
In the 1980s, event loops became integral to windowing systems for maintaining GUI interactivity. The X Window System, first released in 1984 by MIT researchers Robert W. Scheifler and Jim Gettys, employed an asynchronous protocol where the server queued input events (e.g., mouse and keyboard) and dispatched them to clients via a message-passing model, avoiding synchronous blocking to support networked displays. Similarly, Apple's Macintosh Toolbox, introduced with the Macintosh 128K in January 1984, included an Event Manager that structured applications around a central event loop using the WaitNextEvent function to process user actions like clicks and key presses, ensuring smooth multitasking in a single-tasking environment. Concurrently, the Unix select() system call, added in 4.2BSD in August 1983, provided a polling-based mechanism for monitoring multiple file descriptors for readiness, influencing event-driven I/O in networked applications.
The modern era saw event loops extend to web and server-side programming. In 1995, Brendan Eich developed JavaScript (initially Mocha) at Netscape in just ten days, incorporating an event loop inspired by GUI models like HyperCard to handle browser events asynchronously without blocking the UI thread, enabling dynamic web pages in Netscape Navigator 2.0. In 2002, the Twisted framework for Python emerged as an event-driven networking engine, using a reactor pattern to manage asynchronous I/O callbacks for protocols like HTTP and SSH. Building on this, Ryan Dahl released Node.js in 2009, adapting the JavaScript event looppowered by the libuv libraryfor server-side use, facilitating scalable, non-blocking I/O for web applications and popularizing event-driven architecture beyond browsers.

Core Mechanisms

Event Queue and Dispatching

The event queue serves as the central data structure in an event loop, typically implemented as a first-in-first-out (FIFO) mechanism to maintain the order in which events arrive and are processed. This ensures that events are handled sequentially without reordering, preventing race conditions in event-driven systems.
Events stored in the queue are structured as objects comprising essential metadata and content. The metadata generally includes the event type (indicating the category of event, such as a user input or timer expiration), the source (identifying the originator, like a device or subsystem), and additional details like timestamps for sequencing. The payload contains the specific data associated with the event, such as coordinates from a mouse click or response data from an I/O operation, enabling handlers to respond appropriately.
Some event loop implementations employ multiple queues or prioritization to manage varying urgency, rather than a single FIFO structure. For example, the JavaScript event loop distinguishes between microtasksshort, high-priority operations like promise resolutionsand macrotaskslonger tasks such as script executions or timersensuring microtasks are dispatched before subsequent macrotasks to maintain responsiveness.
The dispatching process begins with the event loop continuously iterating to inspect the queue. Upon identifying a non-empty queue, it dequeues the front event (respecting priorities if applicable), matches the event type to one or more registered callbacks or handlers, and invokes the handler synchronously to process the payload, with the expectation that it completes quickly without blocking the loop; any new events generated during execution are enqueued for later handling.
A typical event loop progresses through distinct phases to ensure orderly operation: initialization sets up the queue, registers handlers, and prepares resources; waiting monitors for incoming events without busy-polling; processing dequeues and dispatches events to handlers; and cleanup releases temporary resources, logs outcomes, or handles errors post-execution. These phases repeat until an exit condition, such as an empty queue and no pending inputs, is met. Queue overflow, which occurs when events arrive faster than they can be processed, is managed by strategies like dropping low-priority events or dynamically resizing the queue to prevent system stalls.
Priority levels within queues further refine dispatching by assigning weights or separate lanes to events in certain systems, ensuring critical ones (e.g., interrupts) are handled before routine tasks, thus optimizing system performance under load.
An example flow in an event loop illustrates these mechanics:

An event is enqueued, such as a timer expiration, added to the tail of the appropriate priority queue with its type, source, and payload.

The loop checks the queue during its waiting phase; if non-empty and the execution stack is clear, it proceeds to processing.

The front event is dequeued, matched to a registered handler (e.g., via event type lookup), and the handler is invoked synchronously to act on the payload.

The loop repeats the check-dispatch cycle until the queue empties or a termination signal is received, with cleanup occurring after each dispatch if needed.

Message Passing Model

In the message passing model employed by event loops, messages serve as the fundamental units of communication, encapsulating event details in a structured format to enable decoupled interactions between system components. A typical message includes a sender identifier to trace the origin, an event type field specifying the nature of the eventsuch as a timer signal or input notificationa timestamp recording the event's occurrence, and parameters that provide context-specific data like coordinates or values. This anatomy ensures messages are self-contained and routable, drawing from foundational concurrency models where communicable values form the content alongside addressing information.
The mechanics of message passing adhere to a producer-consumer pattern, where event producerssuch as I/O subsystems or timersgenerate and post messages to a central event queue without directly invoking handlers, thereby avoiding tight coupling between components. The event loop then consumes these messages sequentially, dispatching them to registered handlers based on the event type, which promotes modularity and scalability in concurrent environments. This indirect routing allows the system to handle varying workloads efficiently, as producers operate independently while the loop maintains control over execution order. Event generation and queuing occur asynchronously, while dispatching and handler execution are synchronous within the loop's cycle.
Error handling in message passing emphasizes resilience, with mechanisms such as propagating exceptions from failed handlers, logging errors, or ignoring invalid events to prevent disruption of the loop. This ensures the system continues processing without stalling on individual failures.

Design Variations

Polling-Based Approaches

Polling-based approaches to event loop design involve the periodic or continuous querying of system resources, such as file descriptors for sockets, files, or devices, to detect when they are ready for input/output operations. This is typically implemented using kernel-provided multiplexing system calls that allow a single thread to monitor multiple descriptors efficiently, blocking until readiness is signaled or a specified timeout elapses, rather than relying on constant busy-waiting that wastes CPU cycles. Common examples include the select(), poll(), and epoll() system calls on Unix-like operating systems, which return control to the application only when events occur, enabling non-blocking I/O handling in a loop.
The evolution of these mechanisms began with the introduction of the select() system call in 4.2BSD in 1983, which was developed as part of the Berkeley Sockets API to support multiplexing I/O operations for stateful network servers and daemons like inetd, allowing applications to wait on sets of file descriptors for readability, writability, or exceptions with an optional timeout. This addressed the limitations of earlier per-descriptor blocking calls by enabling scalable monitoring without multiple threads. Later, the poll() system call emerged in UNIX System V Release 3 around 1988 to overcome select()'s constraints, such as its fixed-size bitmask for descriptors (typically limited to 1024), using a more flexible array-based structure for arbitrary numbers of file descriptors. In Linux, poll() was added in kernel version 2.1.23 in 1997. To further enhance scalability for high-concurrency scenarios, epoll() was introduced in the Linux kernel 2.5.45 in 2002 by developer Davide Libenzi, providing an event-driven interface with O(1) complexity for adding, removing, and checking large numbers of descriptors, unlike the O(n) scanning in select() and poll(). A key advancement in epoll() is its support for both level-triggered and edge-triggered notifications: level-triggered mode, akin to select() and poll(), signals repeatedly as long as the descriptor remains ready (e.g., data available in a buffer), while edge-triggered mode notifies only once upon a state transition (e.g., new data arriving), which can reduce wake-up frequency but demands that applications drain all ready events to avoid starvation.
These approaches offer straightforward implementation, broad portability across Unix variants, and compatibility with existing file descriptor semantics, making them ideal for applications with moderate event volumes or where simplicity outweighs peak performance needs, such as small servers or embedded systems. However, they introduce potential drawbacks, including higher CPU overhead from repeated kernel-user space transitions in high-event-rate environmentsexacerbated by select() and poll()'s linear iteration over all monitored descriptors on each calland increased latency if timeouts are used to poll infrequently, though blocking variants minimize idle CPU usage compared to true busy-polling. Epoll() mitigates scalability issues with its kernel-managed descriptor sets and efficient wait queues, achieving better throughput for thousands of connections, but its Linux-specific nature limits portability. Overall, polling-based event loops excel in low-to-medium event scenarios by providing reliable readiness detection without complex signaling infrastructure.
A seminal example is the Unix select() API, which takes three bitmask sets (for read, write, and exception events) along with the highest descriptor number and a timeout structure, returning the number of ready descriptors and modifying the masks to indicate which ones are actionable, thus forming the basis for many early event-driven network applications.

Callback and Promise Patterns

In event-driven systems, the callback pattern involves registering functions as event handlers that are invoked automatically when a corresponding event is triggered within the event loop. This approach decouples event detection from response logic, allowing the loop to dispatch the appropriate callback upon event occurrence, thereby maintaining non-blocking execution. However, it introduces an inversion of control, where the calling code relinquishes direct flow management to the event system, potentially complicating debugging and resource tracking.
A common challenge with nested callbacks in sequential asynchronous operations is "callback hell," characterized by deeply indented code structures that reduce readability and increase error-proneness, often referred to as the pyramid of doom. This arises from chaining multiple asynchronous calls, each embedding its successor as an argument, leading to maintenance difficulties in large applications. To mitigate this, developers may refactor into named functions or modularize handlers, though these do not fully address the underlying control inversion.
The promise pattern addresses these limitations by representing asynchronous operations as objects that encapsulate a future value or error, enabling deferred resolution without immediate nesting. Upon initiation, a promise enters a pending state and settles to fulfilled (with a value) or rejected (with a reason), allowing subsequent operations to chain via the .then() method for sequential asynchronous flows. This chaining returns new promises, facilitating linear code structure while preserving event loop integration through deferred invocation. Error propagation occurs via rejection handlers in .catch() or as the second argument to .then(), ensuring failures halt execution appropriately without manual bubbling.
In the event loop, promises integrate as microtasks, enqueued for execution immediately after the current task completes but before the next macrotask, prioritizing them over timers or I/O events for responsive handling. This ensures post-event callbacks from resolved promises run promptly during the microtask checkpoint, maintaining the loop's single-threaded concurrency model. Unhandled rejections are tracked and reported, often triggering events for global error monitoring.
An alternative to explicit promise chaining is the async/await syntax, introduced in ECMAScript 2017 as syntactic sugar over promises, which simplifies perceived concurrency by allowing asynchronous code to resemble synchronous flows using await to pause until promise resolution. This abstraction hides boilerplate while internally queuing continuations as microtasks, enhancing readability without altering the underlying event loop mechanics.
// Example: Callback pattern with nesting (callback hell)
readFile('file1.txt', function(err, data1) {
 if (err) return handleError(err);
 readFile(data1.path, function(err, data2) {
 if (err) return handleError(err);
 processData(data1, data2);
 });
});

// Equivalent with promises (chaining)
readFile('file1.txt')
 .then(data1 => readFile(data1.path).then(data2 => processData(data1, data2)))
 .catch(handleError);

// With async/await
async function loadAndProcess() {
 try {
 const data1 = await readFile('file1.txt');
 const data2 = await readFile(data1.path);
 processData(data1, data2);
 } catch (err) {
 handleError(err);
 }
}

Usage Contexts

Asynchronous I/O and File Handling

Asynchronous I/O in event loops relies on non-blocking system calls to prevent processes from stalling during input/output operations. In Unix-like systems, the O_NONBLOCK flag, defined in the POSIX standard, is used to configure file descriptors for non-blocking mode via the fcntl() function. When set, operations such as read() or write() return immediately if data is unavailable, typically with an EAGAIN or EWOULDBLOCK error, allowing the event loop to register interest in I/O readiness events and continue processing other tasks. This approach contrasts with blocking I/O, enabling efficient multiplexing of multiple operations within a single thread.
File handling within event loops involves monitoring file descriptors for read and write readiness to manage data streams without interruption. The loop registers descriptors using mechanisms like select() or poll(), which notify when events occur, such as data availability for reading or space for writing. To handle partial readswhere only a portion of expected data arrivesapplications integrate buffers to accumulate incoming bytes across multiple event notifications, tracking state with pointers to ensure complete messages are processed only when ready. This buffering prevents data loss and maintains protocol integrity, as non-blocking reads may return fewer bytes than requested.
In network applications, event loops facilitate scalable server designs by managing socket connections asynchronously. Servers accept incoming connections on a listening socket and register client sockets for read/write events, allowing the loop to dispatch handlers for tasks like receiving requests or sending responses without dedicated threads per connection. This model supports thousands of concurrent operations, as demonstrated in evaluations of event-dispatch mechanisms, where single-threaded loops using non-blocking I/O achieve high throughput (up to 3500 replies per second) across 3000 connections by minimizing context-switching overhead compared to multi-threaded alternatives.
Best practices for event loops in asynchronous I/O emphasize managing resources and preventing hangs through limits and timeouts. Applications should enforce bounds on buffer sizes and connection counts to avoid memory exhaustion, such as capping input lengths to mitigate denial-of-service risks from oversized payloads. Timeout handling integrates into event registration, where mechanisms like select() accept a timeout parameter to avoid indefinite waits, ensuring the loop yields control periodically. For example, reading from stdin without blocking involves setting the O_NONBLOCK flag on its file descriptor (typically 0) and monitoring it in the loop, allowing non-interactive input processing alongside other events while returning immediately if no data is available.

Signal and Interrupt Management

In operating systems, signals serve as asynchronous notifications sent to processes to indicate the occurrence of specific events, such as user interrupts (e.g., SIGINT from Ctrl+C) or termination requests (e.g., SIGTERM from a system command). These POSIX-defined signals allow the kernel to communicate exceptional conditions without synchronous polling, enabling responsive applications. In event-driven architectures, direct processing of signals within handlers is limited to asynchronous-signal-safe functions to prevent undefined behavior, as handlers can interrupt normal execution at any point.
To integrate signals safely into an event loop, the self-pipe trick is commonly employed, where a non-blocking pipe is created at process startup, and the signal handler writes a single byte to the pipe's write end upon receipt. This byte becomes readable on the pipe's read end, which the event loop monitors via mechanisms like select() or epoll(), allowing the signal to be enqueued as an event without complex synchronization in the handler itself. Libraries such as libevent implement this internally for signal events, using evsignal_add() to register handlers that set a flag and write to the self-pipe, ensuring the loop dispatches the associated callback during its next iteration.
Hardware interrupts, generated by devices like keyboards or timers, are initially captured and processed by the operating system kernel, which translates them into user-space notifications such as signals or readable data on file descriptors. For instance, a keyboard interrupt may result in input becoming available on a device file (/dev/input/eventX), which the event loop can poll. To mitigate reentrancy issues in single-threaded event loopswhere an interrupt could preempt ongoing processinghandling is deferred: the kernel or driver enqueues the event, and the loop processes it sequentially during dispatching, maintaining thread safety.
Event loops typically adopt integration strategies where signal or interrupt handlers perform minimal work, such as enqueuing an event to the loop's queue (as referenced in core mechanisms), while the loop itself handles dispatch without invoking handlers directly. This approach preserves the single-threaded nature of many event loops, avoiding nested invocations that could lead to stack overflows or inconsistent state.
Challenges arise particularly in multi-threaded contexts, where POSIX semantics dictate that signals are delivered to an arbitrary unblocked thread, potentially causing race conditions if multiple threads modify shared data without proper synchronization. To address this, applications use pthread_sigmask() to block signals in worker threads and dedicate a signal-receiving thread or the main event loop thread to handle them, often combining it with the self-pipe trick for safe queuing. Additionally, POSIX requires that only a restricted set of functions (e.g., write() to a pipe) be called from handlers, complicating event-driven code that must avoid non-safe operations like malloc() to prevent crashes or data corruption.

Platform Implementations

JavaScript in Web Environments

In web environments, the event loop follows the model defined in the WHATWG HTML Living Standard, which coordinates the execution of JavaScript tasks, microtasks, and rendering in a single-threaded manner. This specification, introduced around 2008 and continuously updated, outlines an event loop associated with each agent, such as a browsing context or worker, ensuring non-blocking behavior by processing tasks from one or more task queues in a first-in-first-out order. The processing model includes the following steps: the event loop selects and executes the oldest task from the task queue, where tasks encompass timer callbacks from functions like setTimeout and setInterval once their delays expire, as well as callbacks for events such as user interactions or network responses. After executing a task, all pending microtasksprimarily from Promise resolutionsare processed via a dedicated microtask queue until it is empty. Finally, if necessary, the rendering phase updates the user interface, such as repainting elements or reflowing the document. This approach prevents long-running scripts from freezing the browser by interleaving asynchronous operations with UI updates.
Node.js implements a variant of the event loop using the libuv C library as its backend, adapting the web model for server-side environments while maintaining single-threaded JavaScript execution. Libuv handles the underlying I/O operations, allowing Node.js to process asynchronous tasks like file reads or network requests without blocking the main thread. The event loop in Node.js cycles through six phases: timers for setTimeout and setInterval callbacks; pending callbacks for deferred I/O events, such as TCP errors; an internal idle/prepare phase for optimization; the poll phase, which retrieves new I/O events from the kernel and executes their callbacks, potentially blocking if no active timers or checks are pending; in strace output for Node.js processes, epoll_wait with timeout=0 performs a non-blocking check for available I/O events, returning immediately even if no events are ready; Node.js via libuv uses this when the event loop's backend timeout is calculated as 0, such as when pending callbacks, idle handles, or other conditions require quick return from the poll phase rather than blocking; the check phase for setImmediate callbacks; and close callbacks for handling resource cleanup, like socket closures. Process I/O is managed asynchronously through libuv's integration with the operating system's kernel, queuing completions as tasks to avoid synchronous waits.
A core feature of the JavaScript event loop in web environments is its single-threaded design, where the JavaScript engine maintains a call stack for synchronous code execution, while asynchronous operations like setTimeout are offloaded to host environment APIsbrowser threads or libuv in Node.jswhich schedule callbacks back into the task queue upon completion. This offloading ensures the main thread remains responsive, as Web APIs handle time-intensive tasks externally before enqueueing results. To prevent task starvation, where one phase (e.g., poll in Node.js) might indefinitely block others, libuv imposes system-dependent limits on polling duration, forcing progression to subsequent phases like timers, a refinement introduced in libuv 1.45.0 for Node.js 20.
The event loop's evolution traces back to early JavaScript engines, with SpiderMonkeyMozilla's implementation since 1995 for Netscapepioneering the initial single-threaded runtime model that integrated basic event handling. Google's V8 engine, introduced in 2008 for Chrome, advanced this by optimizing just-in-time compilation while adhering to the emerging WHATWG model, enabling efficient asynchronous processing. Modern enhancements culminated in ECMAScript 2018 (ES2018), which introduced async iterators and the for await...of syntax, allowing asynchronous iteration over iterables that yield Promises, seamlessly integrating with the microtask queue for non-blocking data streams like network responses.

Windows API Message Loops

In Windows applications, the event loop is implemented as a message pump that retrieves, translates, and dispatches messages from a thread's message queue to handle user interface events and system notifications. The core mechanism involves a loop using the GetMessage function to block and retrieve the next message from the queue, TranslateMessage to convert virtual-key messages into character messages for keyboard input, and DispatchMessage to route the message to the appropriate window procedure for processing. A typical implementation appears as follows:
MSG msg;
while (GetMessage(&msg, NULL, 0, 0)) {
 TranslateMessage(&msg);
 DispatchMessage(&msg);
}
This loop continues until a WM_QUIT message is retrieved, signaling the application to exit. For non-blocking variants, developers use PeekMessage, which checks the queue without suspending the thread, allowing integration with other operations like waiting on synchronization objects.
Messages in the Windows API are identified by WM_-prefixed constants, such as WM_PAINT for window repaints triggered by invalidation and WM_TIMER for periodic timer events set via SetTimer. Each message is represented by a thread-local MSG structure containing fields like the message identifier, window handle, parameters (wParam and lParam), time, and cursor position. The message queue is per-thread and FIFO-ordered for input events to preserve sequence, with higher-priority messages like keyboard and mouse input processed before lower-priority ones such as WM_PAINT or WM_TIMER to ensure responsive user interaction.
Windows distinguishes between posted and sent messages in queuing: posted messages, via PostMessage, are asynchronously added to the thread's queue for later retrieval by GetMessage, while sent messages, via SendMessage, are synchronously delivered directly to the target window procedure without entering the queue, blocking the sender until handled. This separation allows efficient handling of immediate responses versus deferred processing.
Extensions to the standard loop include modal message loops for dialogs, where the system temporarily takes control of the thread's queue upon creating a modal dialog with DialogBox, using a specialized loop with IsDialogMessage to filter and process dialog-specific inputs until EndDialog is called. Additionally, the message loop integrates with Component Object Model (COM) in single-threaded apartments (STA), where each apartment's thread requires a pump to serialize incoming calls from other threads or processes, ensuring thread-safe marshaling without explicit locking.

Unix-like Systems and X11

In Unix-like systems, event loops commonly employ system calls such as select(), poll(), and epoll() to multiplex I/O operations across multiple file descriptors, enabling efficient monitoring without blocking on individual operations. The select() function allows a program to wait until one or more file descriptors become ready for reading (via the readfds set), writing (via the writefds set), or exceptional conditions (via the exceptfds set), using bit masks in fd_set structures to specify interest in these events. Similarly, poll() provides a more scalable alternative by using an array of struct pollfd entries, where the events field specifies desired conditions like POLLIN for readability or POLLOUT for writability, and the revents field reports occurred events upon return, avoiding the fixed-size limitations of select(). On Linux, epoll() offers further efficiency for high-volume scenarios through an interest list managed by epoll_ctl() and a ready list queried by epoll_wait(), supporting events such as EPOLLIN for incoming data and EPOLLOUT for output readiness, with options for level- or edge-triggered notifications.
The X Window System (X11) integrates event handling into these I/O mechanisms by treating the connection to the X server as a file descriptor, accessible via ConnectionNumber(display), which can be monitored using select(), poll(), or (/page/Epoll)() for incoming protocol requests. Events are queued asynchronously in the client-side event queue, and the XNextEvent() function retrieves and dequeues the next eventsuch as an Expose event signaling a need to repaint an uncovered window or a ButtonPress event indicating a mouse button activationblocking if the queue is empty until new data arrives over the connection. This setup allows applications to process graphical input like pointer movements or key presses in a loop, dispatching them based on event masks set during window creation to filter relevant types.
In Xlib-based applications, the event loop often incorporates higher-level abstractions from the X Toolkit Intrinsics (Xt), where XtAppMainLoop() provides a default implementation that repeatedly calls XtAppNextEvent() to fetch events from the queue and XtDispatchEvent() to route them to registered callbacks or widget handlers, ensuring asynchronous processing across multiple displays. Custom loops can integrate X events with other I/O sources by adding the X connection's file descriptor to a select() or poll() monitor, processing protocol requests non-blockingly before resuming the main dispatch cycle.
Wayland, introduced in 2012 as a modern successor to X11, maintains a similar event queuing model for handling input and display updates but shifts responsibility to compositors, reducing reliance on a centralized X server while using file descriptor-based multiplexing for protocol messages via libraries like libwayland.

Cross-Platform Libraries (GLib and Core Foundation)

GLib provides a cross-platform abstraction for event loops through its main loop implementation, centered on the GMainLoop and GMainContext structures. The GMainLoop represents the event loop itself, created via g_main_loop_new() and executed with g_main_loop_run(), which processes events until explicitly quit using g_main_loop_quit(). The associated GMainContext serves as the core dispatcher, managing a set of event sources in a thread-safe manner; it runs in only one thread at a time, but sources can be attached or detached from other threads.
Event sources in GLib are represented by GSource objects, which encapsulate various event types such as timeouts and I/O operations. Timeouts are scheduled using functions like g_timeout_add(), which triggers a callback after a specified interval, while I/O sources monitor file descriptors via g_source_add_poll() to detect readability or writability. Idle callbacks, added through g_idle_add(), execute when no higher-priority events are pending, ensuring low-overhead processing of non-urgent tasks. Sources are prioritized with levels such as G_PRIORITY_DEFAULT (0), where negative values indicate higher urgency and positive values lower, allowing fine-grained control over dispatch order.
GLib enhances portability across Unix-like systems and Windows by employing platform-specific backends internally, abstracting low-level polling mechanisms while presenting a unified API; this enables developers to write event-driven code without platform-specific adjustments. Sources can be added dynamically with g_source_attach() and removed using g_source_remove(), supporting runtime modifications even from non-running threads. Nesting is facilitated for modal operations, such as dialogs, by creating inner loops that run within the outer context via g_main_context_iteration(), allowing recursive event processing without blocking the primary loop.
Core Foundation offers the CFRunLoop as its primary event loop mechanism, tailored for efficient thread-based event handling in Darwin-based systems like macOS and iOS. Each thread maintains an implicit CFRunLoop, which dispatches input sources, timers, and observers while optimizing power usage by sleeping when idle. Run loops operate in specific modes, such as the default kCFRunLoopDefaultMode for general tasks or NSEventTrackingRunLoopMode (bridged as UITrackingRunLoopMode in UIKit) for UI event tracking, enabling context-specific source activation. Observers, created as CFRunLoopObserverRef instances, provide callbacks for run loop phases like entry, exit, timer firing, or sleep/wake transitions, with options for one-shot or repeating notifications.
Integration with Cocoa frameworks occurs through toll-free bridging between CFRunLoop and NSRunLoop, allowing seamless use in Objective-C applications; for instance, Cocoa methods like performSelector:onThread:withObject:waitUntilDone: schedule tasks on specific run loops. Sources and timers are added dynamically via CFRunLoopAddSource() or CFRunLoopAddTimer(), and invalidated with CFRunLoopSourceInvalidate() for removal, supporting adaptive event management. Nesting run loops is inherent for modal operations, such as sheets or alerts, where inner activations via CFRunLoopRunInMode() stack recursively on the thread's call stack, exiting innermost first upon CFRunLoopStop() invocation.
While CFRunLoop is primarily focused on Darwin platforms, its API design shares conceptual similarities with other event loop abstractions, such as mode-based source selection and observer patterns, facilitating partial portability in cross-platform efforts involving Apple ecosystems.

References

Event Loop :: CC 410 Textbook

Exceptions, iterators, and event-driven programming - cs.Princeton

 An Event-driven Architecture for MPI Libraries - Rice University

JavaScript execution model - JavaScript | MDN

The Node.js Event Loop

 Event-based Concurrency (Advanced) - cs.wisc.edu

 GUI Event-Driven Programming - Washington

 February 16 5.1 Overview 5.2 Lecture Notes - LASS

https://www.multicians.org/history.html

Early Timesharing - The Early Years of Academic Computing

 Model-View-Controller and Event Driven UI - People @EECS

 The X Window System

 Introduction to the Macintosh Toolbox

poll vs select vs event-based

1996: JavaScript Annoyances and Meeting the DOM | Cybercultural

The Twisted Network Framework

History of Node.js on a Timeline - RisingStack Engineering

What are Event Queues | GigaSpaces

The what, why and how of event-driven programming - Quix

About event-driven architecture - ODC Documentation

Components of Event-Driven Architecture - 3Pillar Global

What Is Event Loop? - ITU Online IT Training

Event Queue - Game Programming Patterns

Is an event loop just a for/while loop with optimized polling?

 Actors: A Model for Reasoning about Open Distributed Systems

 Disciplined Message Passing - Berkeley EECS - UC Berkeley

Overview of Service Bus dead-letter queues - Azure - Microsoft Learn

select(2) - Linux manual page - man7.org

poll(2) - Linux manual page - man7.org

epoll(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

A brief history of select(2) Idea of the day - popcount.org

The poll() system call - USENIX

epoll: The API that powers the modern internet - Graham King

sys_epoll - making poll fast - LWN.net

 Event-driven Programming for Robust Software - People | MIT CSAIL

 Don't Call Us, We'll Call You: Characterizing Callbacks in JavaScript

Continuations and Aspects to Tame Callback Hell on the Web

Promises/A+

HTML Standard

https://tc39.es/ecma262/multipage/ecmascript-language-functions-and-classes.html#sec-async-function-definitions

fcntl - The Open Group Publications Catalog

A tiny introduction to synchronous non-blocking IO - libevent

Concurrent Servers: Part 3 - Event-driven - Eli Bendersky's website

 Scalability of Linux Event-Dispatch Mechanisms

Don't Block the Event Loop (or the Worker Pool) - Node.js

<signal.h>

The self-pipe trick

The Self-Pipe Trick Explained - SitePoint

signal_add(3) - Linux manual page - man7.org

User-space interrupts - LWN.net

Working with events - libevent

pthread_sigmask

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#event-loop-processing-model

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#rendering-opportunities

Design overview - libuv documentation

https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-asyncgeneratorfunction-definitions

Using Messages and Message Queues - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

About Messages and Message Queues - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

PeekMessageA function (winuser.h) - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

Window Messages (Get Started with Win32 and C++) - Microsoft Learn

About Dialog Boxes - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

Single-Threaded Apartments - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

https://www.x.org/releases/current/doc/libX11/libX11/libX11.html#Display_Macros

https://www.x.org/releases/current/doc/libX11/libX11/libX11.html#Returning_the_Next_Event

https://www.x.org/releases/current/doc/libX11/libX11/libX11.html#Event_Queue_Management

https://www.x.org/releases/current/doc/libXt/intrinsics.html#The_Application_Input_Loop

https://www.x.org/releases/current/doc/libXt/intrinsics.html#XtAppMainLoop

Wayland

The Main Event Loop - GLib 2.0 - GTK Documentation

GLib.MainLoop

https://docs.gtk.org/glib/struct.MainContext.html

GLib.Source

GLib 2.0 - GTK Documentation

supported-platforms.md - GNOME / GLib - GitLab

Run Loops - Apple Developer

CFRunLoop | Apple Developer Documentation

CFRunLoopObserver | Apple Developer Documentation

https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/nsrunloop

CFRunLoopRunInMode | Apple Developer Documentation

Formalizing the unavailability of Core Foundation - Swift Forums
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion