Fibonacci heap Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Fibonacci heap
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A Fibonacci heap is a data structure designed for efficient implementation of priority queues, consisting of a collection of item-disjoint, heap-ordered trees that satisfy the min-heap property, where the key of a node is less than or equal to the keys of its children, with no restrictions on the number or structure of these trees. Introduced by Michael L. Fredman and Robert E. Tarjan in 1984, it builds on binomial queues to achieve superior amortized performance for certain operations compared to binary or binomial heaps. The structure maintains roots in a circular doubly-linked list, with each node storing a rank (approximating the number of children), pointers to parent, children, and siblings, and a mark bit to track recent child losses during consolidations.
Key operations include insert and union (melding two heaps), both running in amortized O(1) time by simply adding new trees to the root list; find-min, which is O(1) via a pointer to the minimum root; and decrease-key, which is also amortized O(1) by cutting links to propagate changes efficiently without immediate restructuring. The delete-min operation, involving extraction of the minimum and consolidation of roots by rank to merge trees of equal degree (ensuring no two roots share the same rank, akin to Fibonacci numbers), runs in amortized O(log n) time, where n is the number of elements. These bounds are derived using the potential method, with potential defined as the number of trees plus twice the number of marked non-root nodes, bounding the total time for m operations by O(m + n log n) in the worst case starting from an empty heap.
Fibonacci heaps excel in scenarios requiring frequent decrease-key operations, such as shortest-path algorithms like Dijkstra's or Johnson's, where they reduce the time complexity from O(m log n) (with binary heaps) to O(m + n log n). Despite their theoretical advantages, practical implementations can suffer from high constants and complex pointer manipulations, making them less common in standard libraries compared to simpler structures like binary heaps.

Introduction

Definition and Properties

A Fibonacci heap is a priority queue data structure consisting of a collection of heap-ordered trees that satisfy the minimum-heap property, meaning the key of a node is less than or equal to the keys of its children. The children of each node are organized in a circular doubly-linked list, facilitating efficient local modifications and traversals. This organization allows the heap to represent a set of elements with priorities, supporting operations like insertion and extraction of the minimum element.
Key properties of the Fibonacci heap include its lazy approach to merging trees, achieved by linking trees of the same degree only when necessary during certain operations, which defers consolidation to maintain efficiency. It explicitly supports the decrease-key operation, enabling the reduction of a node's priority without immediate restructuring. These features contribute to its amortized performance guarantees, with insert, find-minimum, and union operations running in amortized O(1) time, while decrease-key also achieves amortized O(1) time. Extract-minimum operates in amortized O(log n) time, where n is the number of elements.
The name "Fibonacci heap" originates from the role of Fibonacci numbers in the potential function analysis of the structure, particularly in bounding the degrees of trees: a tree of degree d contains at least the (d+2)th Fibonacci number of nodes, preventing excessive tree heights and ensuring logarithmic bounds for key operations.

Historical Development and Motivation

The Fibonacci heap was developed by Michael L. Fredman and Robert E. Tarjan in 1984, with their seminal work first presented at the 25th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science and later published in full in 1987. This data structure emerged as an advancement in priority queue implementations, specifically designed to enhance the efficiency of graph algorithms that rely on frequent key updates.
The development of Fibonacci heaps built upon earlier innovations in heap structures, particularly the binomial heaps introduced by Jean Vuillemin in 1978. While binomial heaps improved upon the basic binary heap by supporting efficient merging through a collection of binomial trees, Fibonacci heaps extended this foundation by incorporating a lazy merging strategy during consolidation, which aimed to reduce overhead and yield better amortized constants in practice.
The core motivation for inventing Fibonacci heaps was to accelerate the decrease-key operation in priority queues, which traditionally incurred O(log n) time in binary heaps and limited the performance of algorithms like Dijkstra's for shortest paths. By enabling amortized constant-time decrease-key, Fibonacci heaps addressed these bottlenecks, facilitating faster overall runtimes for shortest-path computations and related optimization tasks.
Initially, Fibonacci heaps found application in theoretical computer science, particularly for improving the time complexity of network flow algorithms and minimum spanning tree computations, such as those based on variants of Dijkstra's and Prim's methods.

Data Structure

Node Components

A node in a Fibonacci heap represents an individual element and stores both its priority and associated data, while maintaining structural links to facilitate heap operations. Each node contains a key field, which holds a real-valued priority used for ordering, and a value field for the associated payload data. Additionally, nodes include a degree field, an integer that tracks the number of child subtrees directly attached to the node.
To support the heap's tree-based organization, nodes feature several pointer fields: a parent pointer linking to the node's parent (null for roots), a child pointer referencing one of its children, and left and right sibling pointers that connect the node to its siblings in a circular doubly-linked list. This sibling linking allows efficient traversal and manipulation of subtrees without requiring full child lists. The circular nature ensures that the list can be traversed bidirectionally, with each node pointing to its neighbors or itself if it is the sole member.
Fibonacci heap nodes also include a mark bit, a binary flag initially set to unmarked when a node becomes a child of another. This bit is used to track whether a node has lost a child during certain structural adjustments, helping to monitor the heap's potential without immediate reorganization.
The collection of root nodes in a Fibonacci heap is maintained as a circular doubly-linked list, enabling constant-time concatenation and traversal. A dedicated pointer, often called min, references the root with the smallest key, providing quick access to the heap's minimum element. For illustration, consider a single node x with key 5, degree 0, unmarked, no parent, no child, and left/right pointers looping to itself; if it gains a child y (key 7, degree 0), x's child pointer points to y, y's parent points to x, and y's left/right form a self-loop, while x's degree increments to 1.

Heap Organization and Properties

A Fibonacci heap is structured as a forest of heap-ordered trees, where the roots of these trees are maintained in a doubly-linked circular list to facilitate efficient access and modification. Each tree in the forest is min-heap ordered, meaning the key of any node is greater than or equal to the key of its parent, ensuring that the minimum key among all roots is the overall minimum in the heap. Unlike balanced heap structures, Fibonacci heaps impose no strict balance requirement, allowing trees to vary in height and potentially grow unevenly, which supports amortized efficiency in operations.
The children of each node are organized in a doubly-linked circular list, enabling constant-time splicing and linking of subtrees without reordering. This organization allows the heap to represent a collection of item-disjoint trees, with the forest as a whole serving as the priority queue. The lack of enforced balance contributes to the heap's flexibility, as trees can merge lazily, preserving structural invariants only when necessary.
A key structural property is the degree (or rank) rule, which ensures that no two trees in the root list have the same degree, defined as the number of children of the root node. This uniqueness is maintained lazily, primarily through consolidation steps during certain operations, where trees of equal degree are linked to form a higher-degree tree, preventing proliferation of similar-sized structures. The degree property underpins the heap's potential for logarithmic height bounds, as each tree's size grows exponentially with its degree, roughly following Fibonacci numbers.
In standard implementations, each node includes a parent pointer to facilitate upward traversal, along with pointers to one child and left/right siblings for the circular lists.

Core Operations

Insertion and Union

The insertion operation in a Fibonacci heap adds a new element by creating a single-node tree and incorporating it into the heap's root list. Specifically, a new node is allocated for the item, initialized as its own root with degree zero, and then linked into the circular, doubly-linked root list of the existing heap. This linking is performed in constant time by updating the left and right pointers of the adjacent roots. If the new node's key is smaller than the current minimum, the minimum pointer is updated accordingly. The entire process requires O(1) time and is lazy, as it avoids any immediate consolidation of tree degrees to maintain efficiency.
Pseudocode for insertion (assuming a helper function UNION for melding):
FIB-HEAP-INSERT(H, x)
 create new node x with key and item
 x.left x
 x.right x
 x.parent NIL
 x.child NIL
 x.mark FALSE
 x.degree 0
 H UNION(H, create-heap(x))
 return H
The union operation merges two Fibonacci heaps, H and H, into a single heap without reordering or consolidating trees. It concatenates the root lists of both heaps by splicing the circular doubly-linked structures in constant time: connect the end of one list to the start of the other and vice versa, using the min.left as the last node in each list. The minimum pointer of the resulting heap is then set to the root with the smaller key value among the two original minima. This approach preserves the lazy nature of the structure, deferring degree consolidation until necessary.
Pseudocode for union (assuming NIL indicates empty heap via min = NIL):
UNION(H, H)
 if H.min = NIL
 return H
 if H.min = NIL
 return H
 // Ensure H has the smaller min
 if H.min.key > H.min.key
 swap H H
 // Concatenate H's root list to H's
 H_last H.min.left
 H_last H.min.left
 H_last.right H.min
 H.min.left H_last
 H_last.right H.min
 H.min.left H_last
 // Min is already H.min (smaller)
 H.n H.n + H.n
 return H

Find-Minimum and Extract-Minimum

The find-minimum operation in a Fibonacci heap returns the node indicated by the heap's min-pointer, which always points to a root containing the minimum key value among all nodes in the heap. This operation requires no traversal or modification and executes in constant O(1) time.
The extract-minimum operation removes the minimum node from the heap and returns it, while restructuring the heap to maintain its properties. It begins by removing the node pointed to by the min-pointer from the root list and appending its children (if any) to the end of the root list, effectively promoting them to roots. Following this, a consolidation phase merges trees among the roots to ensure no two roots share the same degree, which is achieved by repeatedly linking pairs of roots with equal degrees. The entire operation runs in amortized O(log n) time, where n is the number of nodes in the heap.
Linking occurs between two roots of the same degree by comparing their keys: the root with the larger key becomes a child of the root with the smaller key, preserving the min-heap order; the parent's degree is then incremented by one, and the child is removed from the root list. If the linked result causes another degree conflict, linking propagates accordingly. To facilitate efficient consolidation, an auxiliary array A of size at most 1 + log(n) + 1 (bounded by the maximum possible degree) is used, indexed by degree, to track at most one root per degree value; roots are processed sequentially, and linking is performed iteratively until a unique degree slot is found. After consolidation, the new minimum root is identified by scanning the non-null entries in A, and the min-pointer is updated accordingly.
The consolidation step can be expressed in pseudocode as follows (adapted for degree-based indexing, with roots processed from the original root list):
A = array of size D_max, initialized to null // D_max log n + 1
for each root r in the root list (excluding the extracted min):
 d = degree(r)
 while A null:
 s = A
 if key(r) > key(s):
 swap(r, s)
 link(s, r) // Make s a child of r, increment degree(r) to d + 1, remove s from roots
 A = null // Clear the original slot
 d = degree(r)
 A = r

// Rebuild root list from non-null A entries and find new min
min = null
for i = 0 to D_max:
 if A null:
 add A to root list
 if min = null or key(A) < key(min):
 min = A
H.min = min
This process guarantees unique degrees for all roots post-extraction, with the loop executing a number of linking steps proportional to the number of roots in amortized O(log n) time overall.

Advanced Operations

Decrease-Key

The decrease-key operation in a Fibonacci heap reduces the key value of a specified node, assuming direct access to the node via a handle, which is essential for applications like shortest-path algorithms where frequent key updates occur. This operation maintains the heap order while minimizing structural changes to achieve amortized efficiency. If the new key does not violate the min-heap property with respect to the node's parent, the update is simply applied, and the minimum pointer is adjusted if necessary; otherwise, the node is detached from its subtree to prevent order violations, with potential propagation of detachments upward.
The core algorithm proceeds as follows: first, assign the new smaller key to the node xxx. If xxx is a root or the new key is at least as large as its parent's key, no further action is needed beyond possibly updating the heap's minimum pointer. However, if the new key is smaller than the parent's key, perform a cut on xxx: remove xxx from its parent's child list, decrement the parent's degree, add the subtree rooted at xxx to the heap's root list, set xxx's parent to null, and clear xxx's mark bit (indicating it has not lost a child since last becoming a child). Then, invoke a cascading-cut on the former parent to handle potential further detachments. This ensures heap order is preserved without immediate full reorganization.
The cut operation isolates a subtree efficiently by severing the link to its parent and integrating it as a new root tree, which reduces the parent's degree by one and avoids deep traversals. The cascading-cut mechanism then checks the parent yyy: if yyy is unmarked and non-root, mark it to signal the loss of its first child; if yyy is already marked, cut yyy from its own parent and recursively cascade upward until an unmarked non-root node is reached or the root level is hit. This propagation is limited because each node can be marked at most once before being cut, deferring expensive consolidations to extract-min operations.
Here is pseudocode for the decrease-key operation, adapted from the original description:
DECREASE-KEY(H, x, k)
 if k > x.key
 error "new key larger than current key"
 x.key = k
 if x.p != NIL and x.key < x.p.key
 CUT(H, x)
 CASCADING-CUT(H, x.p)
 if x.key < H.min.key
 H.min = x

CUT(H, x)
 remove x from x.p.child-list
 x.p.degree = x.p.degree - 1
 add x to H.root-list
 x.p = NIL
 x.mark = FALSE

CASCADING-CUT(H, y)
 if y NIL
 if y.mark = FALSE
 y.mark = TRUE
 else
 CUT(H, y)
 CASCADING-CUT(H, y.p)
This structure enables an amortized O(1) time complexity for decrease-key by lazily deferring the cost of cuts through marking: each cut pays for marking its parent, but cascading cuts are charged against the release of prior marks, bounding the total work per operation despite occasional chains of detachments.

General Deletion

In Fibonacci heaps, the deletion of an arbitrary node xxx is typically implemented by first reducing its key to -\infty (or the smallest possible value in the problem domain), which invokes the decrease-key operation to promote xxx to the root level by cutting it from its parent and potentially cascading cuts to maintain the heap properties. This step ensures that xxx becomes the new minimum element, with its subtrees properly integrated into the root list during the cuts. Once xxx is the minimum, the extract-min operation is performed to remove it entirely from the heap, consolidating the root list by linking trees of equal degree as needed.
If the node xxx is already a root, the decrease-key to -\infty has no structural effect beyond updating the key, and extract-min directly removes it while handling consolidation. For the special case where xxx is the current minimum, deletion simply proceeds via extract-min without needing the decrease-key step, preserving the children trees in the root list. This composite approach leverages the efficient decrease-key and extract-min primitives to achieve the deletion.
The amortized time complexity of general deletion is O(logn)O(\log n)O(logn), where nnn is the number of nodes in the heap, primarily dominated by the extract-min operation, as decrease-key runs in O(1)O(1)O(1) amortized time. Edge cases, such as deleting the minimum or a root node, ensure no loss of subtrees, as the cut mechanism during decrease-key explicitly adds children to the root list before removal.

Theoretical Analysis

Amortized Time Complexity

The amortized time complexity of operations on Fibonacci heaps is determined using the potential method, which calculates the average cost of a sequence of operations by accounting for changes in a potential function that measures the "credit" stored in the data structure.
The potential function for a Fibonacci heap HHH is defined as (H)=t(H)+2m(H)\Phi(H) = t(H) + 2m(H)(H)=t(H)+2m(H), where t(H)t(H)t(H) denotes the number of trees in HHH and m(H)m(H)m(H) is the number of marked nodes. This function is nonnegative and starts at zero for an empty heap, allowing the total amortized cost of a sequence of operations to equal the total actual cost plus the final potential minus the initial potential.
During insertion, the potential change =1\Delta \Phi = 1=1, as t(H)t(H)t(H) increases by 1 while m(H)m(H)m(H) remains unchanged, yielding an amortized cost of O(1)O(1)O(1). Union (or meld) of two heaps results in =t2\Delta \Phi = t_2=t2, where t2t_2t2 is the number of trees in the added heap, maintaining an amortized cost of O(1)O(1)O(1), since the structure concatenates the root lists, increasing the number of trees but without changing marks. Find-minimum has no structural changes, so =0\Delta \Phi = 0=0 and the amortized cost is O(1)O(1)O(1).
For extract-minimum, the worst-case time is O(n)O(n)O(n) due to consolidation of up to O(n)O(n)O(n) roots, but the amortized time is O(logn)O(\log n)O(logn), as the potential decrease offsets the linking costs while \Delta \Phi accounts for the net change in trees after removing the minimum and consolidating roots. Decrease-key has an amortized cost of O(1)O(1)O(1), with \Delta \Phi typically decreasing due to cuts that unmark nodes and increase trees, but bounded to ensure the overall cost remains constant on average.
The potential function effectively "pays" for expensive consolidations in extract-minimum and cascading cuts in decrease-key: cheap operations like insertions and unions build up potential by increasing the number of trees, which is then expended during consolidations (reducing t(H)t(H)t(H)) and cuts (reducing m(H)m(H)m(H)) to amortize their higher actual costs without exceeding the logarithmic or constant bounds.

Degree Bounds and Potential Method

A key structural property of Fibonacci heaps is that the degree ddd of any node is bounded above by O(logn)O(\log n)O(logn), where nnn is the number of nodes in the heap. More precisely, dlogn+1d \leq \lfloor \log_\phi n \rfloor + 1dlogn+1, with =1+52\phi = \frac{1 + \sqrt{5}}{2}=21+5 denoting the golden ratio. This bound arises from the linking rule, which only merges trees of equal rank (degree), and the ordering of children in each tree, ensuring that the subtree rooted at a node of degree ddd contains at least Fd+2F_{d+2}Fd+2 nodes, where FkF_kFk is the Fibonacci sequence defined by F1=1F_1 = 1F1=1, F2=1F_2 = 1F2=1, and Fk=Fk1+Fk2F_k = F_{k-1} + F_{k-2}Fk=Fk1+Fk2 for k3k \geq 3k3.
To establish this minimal subtree size, consider the children of a node xxx of rank kkk, ordered by the sequence in which they were linked to xxx. The iii-th child of xxx has rank at least i2i-2i2, because linking occurs only between equal-rank trees, and any two trees of the same rank would have been merged before attachment, preventing consecutive children from having ranks differing by less than 2. By induction on kkk, the minimal number of nodes SkS_kSk in a tree of rank kkk satisfies Sk1+i=1kSi2S_k \geq 1 + \sum_{i=1}^k S_{i-2}Sk1+i=1kSi2 (with S0=S1=1S_0 = S_1 = 1S0=S1=1), which resolves to the Fibonacci recurrence SkFk+2S_k \geq F_{k+2}SkFk+2. Since the total number of nodes is nnn, it follows that Fd+2nF_{d+2} \leq nFd+2n; given the closed-form approximation Fmm5F_m \approx \frac{\phi^m}{\sqrt{5}}Fm5m, this implies d+2log(n5)+o(1)d+2 \leq \log_\phi (n \sqrt{5}) + o(1)d+2log(n5)+o(1), yielding the stated O(logn)O(\log n)O(logn) bound. Equivalently, building a subtree of degree ddd requires at least Fd+21F_{d+2} - 1Fd+21 insertions, as each node except the root stems from an insertion.
The marking mechanism further supports this bound by limiting child losses during decrease-key operations. An unmarked node becomes marked upon losing its first child to a cut; a second such loss triggers the node itself to be cut from its parent and become a root. Thus, each non-root node can lose at most one child without being cut (via marking), but subsequent losses propagate upward, preventing excessive degree reductions that might otherwise allow unbounded rank increases through repeated linking. This ties into the Fibonacci growth, as the spaced ranks ensure that recovered subtrees contribute minimally to degree inflation.
This degree bound directly informs the amortized analysis via the potential function, which counts the number of trees plus twice the number of marked nodes. During extract-min consolidation, linking merges trees of identical ranks, and since ranks span at most O(logn)O(\log n)O(logn) distinct values, the process requires at most O(logn)O(\log n)O(logn) link operations per extraction, with each linking reducing the number of trees (and thus potential) to offset costs.

Comparisons and Applications

Comparison with Other Priority Queues

Fibonacci heaps offer superior amortized time complexities for several operations compared to binary heaps, particularly in scenarios involving frequent decrease-key operations. In a binary heap, all major operationsinsertion, find-minimum, extract-minimum, and decrease-keyrun in O(log n) worst-case time, while union requires O(n) time in the standard implementation due to the lack of an efficient merging mechanism. These bounds make binary heaps suitable for balanced workloads but less efficient for algorithms like Dijkstra's where decrease-key is common.
Binomial heaps provide a stricter tree structure than Fibonacci heaps, supporting insertion and union in O(log n) worst-case time, extract-minimum in O(log n) time, and decrease-key in O(log n) time, with find-minimum achievable in O(1) time via a root pointer. This results in more predictable performance without amortization, but the rigid linking of trees during operations leads to higher constant factors than simpler structures.
Pairing heaps achieve amortized time bounds similar to Fibonacci heapsO(1) for insertion, union, find-minimum, and decrease-key, and O(log n) for extract-minimumbut with a much simpler implementation based on pairwise linking without explicit degree tracking. However, their worst-case O(log n) bound for decrease-key remains unproven, though experimental analyses confirm competitive practical performance.
The following table summarizes the amortized and worst-case time complexities for key operations across these priority queue structures:
OperationBinary Heap (Worst)Binomial Heap (Worst)Pairing Heap (Amortized)Fibonacci Heap (Amortized)
InsertO(log n)O(log n)O(1)O(1)
UnionO(n)O(log n)O(1)O(1)
Find-MinimumO(1)O(1)O(1)O(1)
Extract-MinimumO(log n)O(log n)O(log n)O(log n)
Decrease-KeyO(log n)O(log n)O(1)O(1)

Despite their theoretical advantages, Fibonacci heaps' lazy consolidation approach results in high constant factors and poor cache locality in practice, often making them slower than binary or pairing heaps for moderate-sized inputs unless decrease-key dominates the workload. Binomial heaps, while more constant-heavy due to eager merging, offer better worst-case guarantees, whereas pairing heaps balance simplicity and efficiency for real-world use.

Practical Uses and Implementations

Fibonacci heaps are primarily employed to accelerate graph algorithms that rely on priority queues, particularly in scenarios involving sparse graphs where decrease-key operations are frequent. In Dijkstra's algorithm for single-source shortest paths, they enable an amortized time complexity of O(m+nlogn)O(m + n \log n)O(m+nlogn), where mmm is the number of edges and nnn the number of vertices, by supporting efficient decrease-key operations during edge relaxation. Similarly, in Prim's algorithm for minimum spanning trees, Fibonacci heaps improve the running time to O(m+nlogn)O(m + n \log n)O(m+nlogn) for connected undirected graphs, outperforming binary heaps in theoretical analyses for dense or sparse structures with many decrease-key calls. They also facilitate optimizations in network flow problems, such as the assignment problem in weighted bipartite matching, achieving O(n2logn+nm)O(n^2 \log n + n m)O(n2logn+nm) time through repeated applications of Dijkstra-like procedures.
Despite these theoretical advantages, Fibonacci heaps exhibit significant practical drawbacks that limit their adoption. High constant factors in operations, stemming from complex pointer manipulations and lazy consolidations, often result in slower performance compared to simpler structures like binary heaps, even when asymptotic bounds suggest otherwise. The extensive use of pointers for parent, child, and sibling links leads to substantial space overhead and poor cache locality, exacerbating runtime inefficiencies in real-world implementations. Consequently, they are rarely used in production software; for instance, in shortest path computations with small integer weights, Dial's bucket queue algorithm is preferred for its linear expected time and low constants, outperforming Fibonacci heaps in practice.
Implementation of Fibonacci heaps requires careful handling of node references, as operations like decrease-key necessitate direct access to internal nodes, typically provided via handles returned during insertion. This design introduces additional memory costs from the pointer-rich tree structure, where each node stores multiple links alongside degree and mark fields. Pseudocode for core operations, including insert, extract-min, and decrease-key, is detailed in standard algorithm textbooks, offering a blueprint for realization in languages supporting dynamic memory allocation.
As of 2025, Fibonacci heaps remain a staple in theoretical computer science education due to their amortized analysis techniques but see limited practical deployment. Empirical studies consistently demonstrate that pairing heaps achieve superior speedsby factors of approximately 1.6 to 1.9 times compared to Fibonacci heaps in workloads such as sorting and Dijkstra's algorithmowing to simpler structures and better practical constants. They are absent from major standard libraries, such as Java's PriorityQueue, which relies on binary heaps for its unbounded priority queue implementation, and appear only in specialized libraries like Boost C++, where a node-based Fibonacci heap variant is available for advanced users. Recent variants, such as strict Fibonacci heaps, aim to match worst-case bounds while addressing some practical inefficiencies, yet the original structure's complexity continues to hinder widespread use.

References

 Fibonacci Heaps and Their Uses in Improved Network Optimization ...

Fibonacci heaps and their uses in improved network optimization ...

Fibonacci Heaps And Their Uses In Improved Network Optimization ...

A data structure for manipulating priority queues - ACM Digital Library

 Fibonacci Heaps and Their Uses in Improved Network Optimization ...

 Fibonacci Heaps Revisited - arXiv

 Fibonacci heap - cs.Princeton

 The pairing heap: a new form of self-adjusting heap

Pairing heaps: experiments and analysis: Communications of the ACM

None

 Fibonacci Heaps

 A Back-to-Basics Empirical Study of Priority Queues - Siddhartha Sen

PriorityQueue (Java Platform SE 8 ) - Oracle Help Center

Data Structures

Strict Fibonacci Heaps | ACM Transactions on Algorithms
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion