Frame rate Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Frame rate
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Frame rate is the frequency at which consecutive still images, known as frames, are captured or displayed in moving-image media such as film, video, and digital animation, typically measured in frames per second (fps). This metric determines the smoothness and perceived quality of motion, with higher rates reducing blur and enhancing realism by more closely approximating continuous movement.
In motion picture production, 24 fps emerged as the global standard in the late 1920s, driven by the need to synchronize projected film with optical soundtracks while minimizing film stock costs and ensuring the persistence of vision illusion. This rate, originally selected as a compromise between technical feasibility and economic efficiency during the transition from silent films (often 1618 fps) to "talkies," remains the benchmark for cinematic storytelling due to its characteristic motion aesthetic. For broadcast television, regional standards vary: 25 fps for PAL systems in much of Europe and Asia, derived from 50 Hz power grids to avoid flicker, and 29.97 fps (non-drop or drop-frame variants) for NTSC in North America, adjusted from 30 fps to accommodate color encoding. These rates, formalized by organizations like the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), ensure compatibility across legacy analog and modern digital workflows.
Higher frame rates, such as 48, 50, 60, or even 120 fps, are increasingly adopted in digital cinema, high-definition video, and interactive media like gaming to capture fast action with greater clarity and reduce judder. SMPTE standards, including extensions in ST 12-3 for timecode, support these elevated rates up to 120 fps for applications requiring enhanced temporal resolution, such as virtual reality and ultra-high-definition streaming. Frame rate selection influences visual fidelity, storage, bandwidth, and processing demands. Frame rate mismatches can cause artifacts such as stuttering or desynchronization in post-production and playback. Additionally, altering the frame rate metadata without re-encoding (while keeping the codec copy settings) preserves the original frame count but changes the playback speed and duration, with a higher specified frame rate resulting in faster playback and shorter duration (or vice versa).

Fundamentals

Definition and Units

Frame rate is defined as the number of frames, or individual still images, displayed or captured per second in moving media such as film, video, or animation. This metric specifically quantifies the frequency at which consecutive frames are presented to create the illusion of motion, distinguishing it from shutter speed, which refers to the duration of exposure for each individual frame during capture, and refresh rate, which measures how frequently a display device updates its screen image, often independently of the source content's frame rate.
The primary unit for frame rate is frames per second (fps), a standard adopted across modern film, television, and digital video production to ensure consistency in playback and synchronization. In early cinema, frame rates were occasionally notated in frames per minute (fpm) due to hand-cranked mechanisms that operated on a per-minute basis; for instance, the common 24 fps rate equates to 1440 fpm through simple multiplication by 60 seconds per minute.
Notation for frame rates includes both integer values, such as 24 fps for cinematic standards or 30 fps for broadcast video, and fractional values like 23.976 fps, which is used for compatibility with NTSC television systems by slightly slowing 24 fps content to align with the 29.97 fps video rate derived from historical broadcast color encoding adjustments. Integer rates provide exact timing for simplicity, while fractional rates ensure seamless integration in legacy workflows without introducing audio pitch shifts or timing drifts.
The frame rate can be calculated using the basic equation:
fps=totalnumberofframesdurationinseconds
\text{fps} = \frac{\text{total number of frames}}{\text{duration in seconds}}
fps=durationinsecondstotalnumberofframes
This formula allows for precise determination of the rate from recorded media duration and frame count, forming the foundation for standards in production and post-processing.

Measurement Techniques

For analog film, frame rate measurement traditionally involves counting the perforations along the film strip (e.g., 16 per frame in 35mm film) over a known length and correlating it with the mechanical speed of the camera or projector, often calibrated using tachometers or stroboscopic devices to verify consistent cranking or motor rates. In hand-cranked systems, practical checks included filming a reference clock or rotating object to assess playback smoothness against expected fps equivalents like 16-18 fps (approximately 960-1080 fpm).
In video production and playback environments, frame rate measurement relies on specialized tools and instruments designed to analyze signal timing, metadata, and frame sequences accurately. Hardware instruments such as waveform monitors are commonly used to visualize luminance and chrominance levels alongside timing information in broadcast and live production settings, enabling verification of frame synchronization and rate consistency in SDI or HDMI signals. Oscilloscopes, particularly those with video-specific triggering capabilities, facilitate precise timing analysis of frame intervals by capturing electrical signal waveforms from video sources, helping detect deviations in frame delivery rates during signal transmission. Software analyzers like MediaInfo provide a unified interface for extracting frame rate data from file containers, displaying details such as average and real-time frame rates without full decoding. Similarly, FFprobe, part of the FFmpeg suite, offers command-line-based probing of multimedia streams to report frame rate metrics in both human-readable and parseable formats.
Practical techniques for measuring frame rate include manual or automated frame counting over defined time intervals, where the total number of frames is divided by the duration to compute frames per second (fps). This method is effective for verifying constant frame rates (CFR) in offline analysis and can be implemented using software tools that enumerate frames from decoded streams. High-speed camera analysis is employed to identify discrepancies in recorded footage, such as irregular frame intervals caused by shutter variations or motion artifacts, by capturing the output at rates exceeding the source video's fps for temporal comparison. Software-based metadata extraction from file formats further simplifies measurement; for instance, in MP4 containers, tools parse box structures like 'tkhd' or 'mdhd' to retrieve timestamp and timescale data, yielding the nominal frame rate embedded during encoding. EXIF metadata in certain camera-generated videos also stores frame rate tags, accessible via standard libraries for quick verification.
Measuring frame rate presents challenges, particularly with variable frame rates (VFR) compared to CFR, as VFR videos exhibit fluctuating inter-frame timestamps that complicate accurate averaging and can lead to playback inconsistencies without proper handling. In compressed streams, such as H.264-encoded MP4s, direct frame rate assessment often requires partial or full decoding due to variable bitrate allocation affecting timestamp reliability, increasing computational demands and potential errors in metadata-only probes. VFR footage from consumer devices exacerbates these issues, as frame dropping or duplication during recording introduces uncertainty in speed and timing calculations, necessitating advanced forensic techniques for resolution.
A specific example of measuring fps in a digital video file involves using FFprobe via the command line for a file named input.mp4. First, run ffprobe -v quiet -print_format json -show_streams input.mp4 to output JSON data, including the video stream's r_frame_rate (real-time rate, e.g., "30/1" for 30 fps) and avg_frame_rate fields under the relevant stream object. For CFR verification, compute the effective rate by extracting frame count with ffprobe -v quiet -count_frames -select_streams v:0 -show_entries stream=nb_read_frames -of csv=p=0 input.mp4 (yielding the total frames) and duration via ffprobe -v quiet -show_entries format=duration -of csv=p=0 input.mp4 (in seconds), then divide frames by duration. This process confirms the frame rate without re-encoding, though for VFR, avg_frame_rate provides an approximation while full stream analysis may reveal variations.

Human Perception

Temporal Resolution Limits

The human visual system processes motion through mechanisms involving persistence of vision, where the retina retains an image for approximately 1/15 to 1/10 of a second (0.067 to 0.1 seconds) after stimulus offset, depending on brightness, and retinal refresh rates determined by photoreceptor response times. This persistence allows discrete frames to blend into perceived continuous motion when presented rapidly enough, with the critical flicker fusion (CFF) threshold marking the frequency at which flickering lights appear steady. For stationary lights, the average CFF threshold is around 50-60 Hz, though it can reach 90 Hz under high luminance and contrast conditions. In motion scenarios, the effective threshold is lower due to reduced sensitivity to temporal changes in moving stimuli.
Temporal resolution, the eye's ability to distinguish successive visual events, varies widely among individuals and contexts, with studies indicating an average limit of 10-12 distinct frames per second for basic motion detection in standard conditions. Higher resolutions, up to 60 images per second or more, are achievable for some individuals, particularly experts like athletes or pilots, and with high-contrast or rapidly changing stimuli, where perception can extend beyond 100 Hz. Early experiments, such as those by Jan Evangelista Purkinje in 1823, demonstrated these limits through observations of afterimages and the persistence of visual impressions from brief flashes, laying foundational insights into how the eye integrates temporal signals.
Several factors influence temporal resolution, including age, which lowers the CFF threshold in older adults due to slowed neural processing; lighting conditions, where higher luminance elevates the threshold by shortening integration times; and the distinction between foveal and peripheral vision, with the fovea supporting higher rates (up to 60 Hz) compared to the periphery (around 20-30 Hz) owing to denser cone photoreceptors. A basic model approximates the CFF threshold frequency as the reciprocal of the photoreceptors' integration time, reflecting the duration over which visual signals are temporally summed before detection of flicker fails:
Thresholdfrequency1integrationtimeofphotoreceptors
\text{Threshold frequency} \approx \frac{1}{\text{integration time of photoreceptors}}
Thresholdfrequencyintegrationtimeofphotoreceptors1
This equation, derived from retinal physiology, typically yields thresholds aligning with observed values of 50-60 Hz for integration times around 16-20 ms under photopic conditions.

Flicker and Motion Blur Effects

Flicker in video and film arises from the intermittent illumination during projection or display, leading to perceived brightness fluctuations when frame rates are low, such as below 24 frames per second (fps). At these rates, the human visual system detects the on-off cycles as strobing or judder, creating an unnatural, jerky motion appearance that disrupts smooth perception. This effect is exacerbated in early cinema projections, where single-blade shutters produced only 16-24 light pulses per second, making flicker highly noticeable.
The 180-degree shutter rule addresses these issues by setting the shutter open time to half the frame interval, promoting natural motion portrayal through balanced exposure that introduces sufficient blur to mask strobing while avoiding excessive sharpness. For a 24 fps production, this equates to a shutter speed of approximately 1/48 second, blending frames perceptually into continuous movement.
Motion blur occurs because each frame captures motion over a finite exposure time, smearing fast-moving objects and contributing to realistic perception when appropriately tuned. The duration of this blur is determined by the exposure time per frame, given by the formula:
Blurduration=shutteranglefractionframerate
\text{Blur duration} = \frac{\text{shutter angle fraction}}{\text{frame rate}}
Blurduration=framerateshutteranglefraction
where shutter angle fraction is the shutter angle in degrees divided by 360. For instance, at 24 fps with a 180-degree shutter (fraction = 0.5), the blur duration is 0.5 / 24 1/48 second, which aligns with natural eye response for everyday motions. A classic example is the wagon-wheel effect, an aliasing artifact where rotating spokes appear stationary or reversing direction if their rotational frequency aliases with the frame rate, as demonstrated in perceptual models of sampled motion.
Early mitigation techniques included double-bladed (or twin-blade) shutters in film projectors, which doubled the light interruption frequency to 48 cycles per second at 24 fps, rendering flicker imperceptible above the critical fusion threshold of the human eye. In video-to-film transfers, pulldown patterns like 3:2 pulldown distribute frames to simulate even motion, reducing judder from mismatched rates such as 24 fps to 30 Hz NTSC displays. Modern LED displays face similar challenges from pulse-width modulation (PWM) dimming, which can induce low-frequency flicker; higher refresh rates (e.g., 120 Hz or above) and elevated PWM frequencies mitigate this by exceeding perceptual thresholds.
Research on high frame rates (HFR) indicates preferences for rates like 48 fps, which diminish motion blur and judder compared to 24 fps, as evidenced in viewer studies where HFR footage scored higher in motion quality for dynamic scenes, though some report unnatural "hyper-realism" without adjusted shutter angles. These findings, drawn from controlled tests with expert and general audiences, highlight 48 fps as a threshold for reducing artifacts in action-heavy content, such as in HFR implementations for films like The Hobbit.
Online demonstrations provide practical illustrations of the visual effects of low frame rates on motion, such as stuttering and judder. The Frames Per Second Comparison Demo features animated examples, including moving spheres, at preset frame rates (15, 25, 48, 60 FPS) to demonstrate stuttering and jerky motion. The TestUFO Frame Rates Demo displays moving objects and text side-by-side at various rates to highlight differences in smoothness and jumpy motion.

Comparative Perception in Animals

Temporal resolution varies across species, with some animals exhibiting higher frame rate perception than humans due to differences in visual system adaptations. For instance, cats perceive motion at approximately 100 frames per second (fps), compared to the human range of 30-60 fps under typical conditions. This enhanced temporal resolution allows cats to detect rapid movements, such as those of prey, more effectively. Veterinary experts attribute this to cats' higher critical flicker fusion threshold, influenced by their retinal structure and faster neural processing. Similar variations exist in other animals; for example, dogs perceive around 70-80 fps, while birds like pigeons can reach up to 140 fps. These differences highlight evolutionary adaptations to specific ecological niches.

Historical Evolution

Silent Film Era

The origins of frame rate in cinema trace back to the late 19th century, with early experiments in motion picture technology emphasizing individual viewing devices over projection. Thomas Edison's Kinetograph camera, developed in the early 1890s, recorded images at approximately 40 frames per second (fps) on 35mm film stock, while the accompanying Kinetoscope peepshow viewer played back films at similar speeds, typically ranging from 40 to 46 fps to ensure smooth motion without excessive flicker. These rates were chosen to balance perceptual smoothness with the mechanical limitations of the continuous-loop film transport system, though actual speeds varied due to manual operation.
A pivotal advancement came in 1896 with Thomas Armat's Vitascope projector, which enabled public screenings and operated at variable speeds, typically 16 to 24 fps, facilitating the transition from peephole devices to large-audience projection. This device used perforated 35mm film pulled intermittently by sprockets, with projector speeds dictated by the operator's hand-cranking to maintain consistent pull-down and reduce film wear. Meanwhile, the Lumire brothers in France established a more economical standard with their Cinmatographe in 1895, filming and projecting at 16 fps, which halved the film consumption compared to Edison's higher rates and made widespread production feasible.
Throughout the silent era, frame rates remained variable, often between 16 and 18 fps for hand-cranked cameras and projectors, influenced by technical constraints such as the need for uniform perforation spacing on film stock to enable reliable sprocket engagement and transport. Projector mechanisms, reliant on manual cranking, introduced inconsistencies, while economic pressuresstemming from the high cost of raw celluloid filmencouraged lower rates to minimize material usage without compromising the illusion of motion. These factors resulted in non-standardized speeds across productions, with rates sometimes exceeding 20 fps for smoother effects in theatrical settings.
Standardization efforts intensified in the mid-1920s as the Society of Motion Picture Engineers (SMPE, later SMPTE) sought uniformity for theatrical projection. In 1927, following surveys of existing practices, the organization adopted 24 fps as the standard for 35mm film, reflecting an average of observed projector speeds and preparing the industry for synchronized sound, though many silent films continued to vary until full implementation. This rate balanced perceptual needs with mechanical reliability, marking the close of the silent era's experimental phase.

Sound and Color Film Transitions

The introduction of synchronized sound to motion pictures in the late 1920s marked a pivotal shift in frame rate standards, as variable speeds common in the silent eratypically ranging from 16 to 22 frames per secondproved incompatible with the precise timing required for audio synchronization. Sound systems demanded a constant film speed to align image and audio tracks without distortion or drift, leading to the adoption of a fixed rate that balanced technical needs with production costs.
The Vitaphone system, developed by Western Electric and implemented by Warner Bros. starting in 1926, established 24 frames per second (fps) as the new benchmark for sound films. This rate, equivalent to 90 feet of film per minute, was selected to ensure sufficient resolution for optical and disc-based sound recording while minimizing film usage compared to higher speeds. The landmark release of The Jazz Singer in 1927, the first feature-length film with extensive synchronized dialogue, utilized Vitaphone at 24 fps, accelerating the industry's transition from silent production. Concurrently, Fox's Movietone optical sound-on-film process, introduced in 1927, also aligned with 24 fps to compete with Vitaphone, though early implementations occasionally varied slightly before standardization. By the early 1930s, the Society of Motion Picture Engineers (SMPE), in coordination with the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, formalized 24 fps as the universal standard for sound cinema through technical bulletins and recommendations, solidifying its role in theatrical exhibition. (Note: The 1932 efforts primarily refined related specifications like aperture dimensions, but frame rate consensus built on prior sound-era agreements.)
The arrival of color processes in the 1930s and widescreen formats in the 1950s preserved this 24 fps foundation, ensuring compatibility across evolving technologies. Technicolor's three-strip system, debuting in the 1932 short Flowers and Trees, operated seamlessly at 24 fps, as the dye-transfer printing process did not alter the underlying frame rate mechanics. Similarly, the 1953 introduction of CinemaScope by 20th Century Fox maintained 24 fps while employing anamorphic lenses to achieve a 2.55:1 aspect ratio, allowing theaters to project sound-era films without speed adjustments.
Central to these transitions was the need for audio-frame synchronization, where 24 fps provided an even count of frames per second, facilitating precise alignment with sound waveforms recorded on the film's optical track. This rate ensured that audio cyclesrequiring consistent linear film velocity for frequency response up to several kilohertzmatched image progression without slippage, a necessity absent in silent film's flexible speeds. Later adaptations, such as transferring 24 fps film to non-matching video formats, introduced pulldown patterns like the 2:3 sequence, which repeats frames (two fields from one frame, three from the next) to convert to 30 fps playback while preserving temporal integrity and pitch.

Broadcast Television Standards

Broadcast television standards for frame rates originated in the analog era, shaped by technical constraints and regional power grid frequencies. In the United States, the National Television System Committee (NTSC) standard was approved by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in March 1941, establishing a frame rate of 30 frames per second for black-and-white transmissions, comprising two interlaced fields per frame at 60 fields per second. This rate aligned with the 60 Hz alternating current (AC) power supply prevalent in North America, minimizing visible flicker from electrical interference in early cathode-ray tube receivers. Experimental work on NTSC traces back to the 1930s, but the 1941 approval marked its formal adoption for commercial broadcasting, effective from July 1, 1941. With the addition of color broadcasting in 1953, the frame rate was precisely adjusted to 29.97 frames per second (and 59.94 fields per second) to allocate spectrum for the color subcarrier without overlapping the audio signal, a change necessitated by the limitations of the existing monochrome infrastructure.
In contrast, European standards developed later to address color transmission challenges. The Phase Alternating Line (PAL) system, introduced in West Germany on August 25, 1967, at the International Radio Exhibition in Berlin, standardized at 25 frames per second with 50 interlaced fields per second. This rate synchronized with the 50 Hz AC power grids common across much of Europe, reducing hum bars and flicker effects similar to NTSC's design. The Sequential Color with Memory (SECAM) standard, first broadcast in France in 1967, also adopted 25 frames per second and 50 fields per second, using 625 scan lines like PAL but with a different color encoding method to enhance transmission stability over long distances. These 50 Hz-derived rates provided a smoother integration with local electrical systems, though they resulted in slightly slower motion portrayal compared to NTSC's higher cadence.
The shift to digital broadcasting in the late 1990s and early 2000s preserved these legacy frame rates for backward compatibility while introducing greater flexibility. The Advanced Television Systems Committee (ATSC) standard, implemented in the United States starting in 1995 and fully transitioned by 2009, retained 29.97 frames per second (59.94 fields per second) as the primary rate for standard-definition content, alongside support for fractional rates like 23.976 frames per second to accommodate 24 frames per second film transfers without temporal speedup or judder. Similarly, the Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) standards, widely adopted in Europe since 1995, maintained 25 frames per second (50 fields per second) to align with PAL and SECAM origins. These digital frameworks eliminated many analog artifacts but kept the regional divides rooted in power grid frequencies60 Hz influencing North American rates and 50 Hz shaping European onesto ensure seamless integration with existing equipment and content libraries.
High-definition television (HDTV) upgrades further expanded options within these standards. ATSC for HDTV, rolled out progressively from 1998, supports 1080p progressive scan at frame rates of 24, 30, and 60 frames per second, enabling cinematic film emulation at 24 fps, broadcast-style delivery at 30 fps, and smoother motion for sports or action at 60 fps, all while accommodating the traditional 29.97 fps for compatibility. DVB-T and DVB-S implementations similarly allow 1080p at 25 and 50 frames per second, with optional 24 fps for international film content. These enhancements marked a departure from strict interlaced field rates, prioritizing progressive formats for improved vertical resolution, though global variations persist due to entrenched infrastructure.

Media Production Applications

Live-Action Film and Video

In live-action film and video production, the standard frame rate of 24 frames per second (fps) has long been established as the norm for achieving a cinematic aesthetic, characterized by a subtle motion blur that mimics the look of traditional film projection. This rate provides a balance between visual continuity and the artistic "dreamy" quality desired in narrative filmmaking, where higher rates might eliminate the intended blur. For television and video content, 30 fps is commonly used in North America to deliver a more realistic and fluid motion suitable for broadcast standards, while 60 fps enhances smoothness for dynamic scenes like sports or action sequences without altering the overall perceptual realism.
Production decisions around frame rates often revolve around trading off motion smoothness against the preservation of a "filmic" blur, where lower rates like 24 fps introduce intentional motion artifacts that contribute to emotional immersion, contrasting with the hyper-real clarity of higher rates that can make scenes feel overly sharp or video-like. High frame rate (HFR) experiments, such as the 48 fps used in Peter Jackson's The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012), aimed to reduce blur and increase detail for 3D viewing but sparked debate over whether the heightened realism detracted from the cinematic illusion. For slow-motion effects, footage is typically captured at 120 fps or higher to allow for conformed playback at 24 fps, extending the duration of action sequences while maintaining temporal detail and avoiding judder.
In production workflows, on-set monitoring often occurs at the native capture frame rate to ensure accurate assessment of motion and exposure, with directors and cinematographers using tools like external recorders or camera viewfinders calibrated to these rates. During post-production, conforming involves aligning high-frame-rate clips to a master timeline, such as 24 fps in software like DaVinci Resolve, where the project settings dictate playback speed and interpolation to integrate slow-motion elements seamlessly without altering the overall narrative pace. Specific implementations, like IMAX's adoption of 48 fps for select releases after 2016including sequences in Avatar: The Way of Water (2022)leverage dual-rate projection to enhance immersion in large-format screenings while offering fallback to 24 fps for broader compatibility.

Animation Processes

In traditional animation, playback is standardized at 24 frames per second (fps), but the production process varies based on style and budget. Full animation, exemplified by Disney classics like Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), typically involves creating 24 unique drawings per second, known as animating "on ones," to achieve fluid, lifelike motion. In contrast, limited animation reduces the drawing count for efficiency; for instance, South Park employs an "on twos" technique, producing 12 unique drawings per second that are held for two frames each during 24 fps playback, resulting in an effective rate of 12 fps. This approach, common in television series, prioritizes expressive poses and dialogue over continuous motion while maintaining cinematic playback speed.
In computer-generated imagery (CGI) pipelines, frame rates are configurable to suit project needs, with software like Autodesk Maya defaulting to 24 fps for film-oriented workflows. Animators set keyframes at this rate for final output, but real-time previews in the viewport often render at higher rates, such as 60 fps, to simulate smoother motion and aid iterative adjustments without full computation. Pixar Animation Studios has adhered to a 24 fps standard for feature films since Toy Story (1995), ensuring compatibility with theatrical projection, though internal simulations for elements like cloth or fluids may use higher sub-frame ratesup to several times the base rateto capture complex dynamics accurately before downsampling to 24 fps.
Stylistic choices in animation frequently manipulate effective frame rates to evoke specific moods or emphasize action. Lower rates, such as 8-10 fps, produce jerky, staccato motion that heightens tension or comedic timing, as seen in select sequences for dramatic impact. Conversely, smooth 3D animations, particularly in CGI, target 30 fps or above to convey realism and fluidity, aligning with viewer expectations for lifelike movement in contemporary productions. These decisions balance artistic intent with technical constraints, drawing on established practices to enhance narrative expression.

Digital Camera Specifications

Digital cameras' frame rates are primarily constrained by sensor architecture, with rolling shutter and global shutter designs imposing distinct limitations on maximum achievable frames per second (fps). Rolling shutter sensors, prevalent in most consumer and mid-range professional models, expose and read out pixels line by line from top to bottom, leading to potential distortion (known as the jello effect) in fast-moving scenes and capping fps due to sequential readout times that can exceed the exposure interval at high speeds. Global shutter sensors, by contrast, expose and read the entire frame simultaneously, eliminating readout delays and distortion, thereby supporting significantly higher fps without compromising image integrity; for example, the Sony 9 III utilizes a full-frame global shutter to deliver up to 120 fps bursts with full autofocus and autoexposure tracking.
Resolution trade-offs further dictate frame rate specifications, as higher pixel counts increase data volume and processing demands, often forcing reductions in fps to maintain manageable bandwidth and heat levels. In 2020s cameras, 4K (ultra-high definition) recording at 60 fps has become standard for smooth motion in professional workflows, while 8K resolutions typically limit to 30 fps due to the quadrupling of pixels straining sensor readout and encoding capabilities, as evidenced in the Nikon Z9, which achieves 8K/60p only through optimized internal processing but defaults to lower rates for extended recording.
Professional cinema cameras like the ARRI Alexa series exemplify tailored specifications for high-frame-rate needs, with the Alexa 35 supporting up to 120 fps in Super 35 format at full 4.6K resolution, often windowed to 2K for even higher rates in slow-motion applications. Action-oriented devices such as GoPro's HERO13 Black prioritize slow-motion versatility, offering 240 fps at 1080p (full HD) for capturing dynamic sequences like sports or stunts. Consumer smartphones, including the iPhone 16 Pro (as of 2024), reflect advancing capabilities with 4K video up to 120 fps, balancing portability and battery life against computational overhead.
Variable frame rate (VFR) support enhances flexibility in digital cameras by permitting non-constant fps within a single recording, which is encoded via standards like H.264 (AVC) and H.265 (HEVC) to accommodate variable bit rates and timestamps. This capability is particularly useful for seamless transitions between normal and slow-motion playback, as implemented in professional camcorders like the Panasonic AG-CX350, which allows VFR from 1 fps to 60 fps in full HD mode.
By 2025, sensor advancements have elevated high-frame-rate options for virtual reality (VR) and immersive applications, with stacked CMOS designs enabling rates like 360 fps at 900p or 400 fps at 720p (HD-equivalent) in cameras such as the GoPro HERO13 Black, facilitating smoother 360-degree capture and reduced motion artifacts in VR content.

Digital and Interactive Media

Computer Graphics Rendering

In computer graphics rendering, particularly for non-interactive applications such as visual effects (VFX) and simulations, frame rate dictates the temporal resolution of the output sequence, influencing both production workflows and final quality. Rendering pipelines typically involve sequential computation on CPU or GPU hardware, where each frame requires processing geometry, lighting, shading, and compositing. The time to render a single frame depends on scene complexity, hardware capabilities, and algorithm efficiency, often measured in seconds or minutes per frame for high-fidelity offline rendering. For film VFX, a target frame rate of 24 frames per second (fps) is standard to align with cinematic motion standards, as seen in tools like Houdini where default animation settings are configured at 24 fps to facilitate seamless integration into 24 fps projects.
Optimization techniques are crucial in offline rendering to adhere to production deadlines, especially when rendering hundreds or thousands of frames. Adaptive sampling methods dynamically adjust the number of samples per pixel based on local image variance, allocating computational resources more efficiently to noisy regions while undersampling uniform areas, thereby reducing overall render time without compromising quality. This approach is particularly valuable in Monte Carlo-based path tracing, common in VFX pipelines, where it helps meet tight schedules by balancing noise reduction with temporal constraints across frames. A key aspect of time estimation involves calculating total render duration, which can be approximated as the product of the frame count and per-frame computation time; for geometry-intensive scenes, per-frame time scales with polygon count divided by GPU throughput (e.g., triangles processed per second). Formally,
Totaltime=frames(polygonsGPUthroughput)
\text{Total time} = \text{frames} \times \left( \frac{\text{polygons}}{\text{GPU throughput}} \right)
Totaltime=frames(GPUthroughputpolygons)
This model highlights how hardware upgrades or scene simplification can accelerate workflows, though actual times vary with additional factors like shading complexity.
Beyond film VFX, frame rate standards in computer graphics extend to digital media outputs. Web animations typically target 60 fps for smooth performance on varied devices, while user interface (UI) applications in software aim for 60 fps to ensure fluid responsiveness and reduce perceived latency. In tools like Blender, the real-time viewport preview operates at up to 60 fps using simplified rendering (e.g., Eevee engine) for interactive editing, contrasting with the final offline output at 24 fps via Cycles for photorealistic film sequences, allowing artists to iterate efficiently without waiting for full renders.

Video Games and Real-Time Simulation

Technical standards for frame rates in video games and virtual reality (VR) emphasize smoothness, low latency, and user comfort, differing markedly from traditional film standards. While cinematic content adheres to 24 fps for a stylized motion blur effect, gaming targets 60 fps as the baseline for console and PC platforms to ensure fluid visuals and responsive controls, with higher rates like 120 fps or more providing enhanced immersion on capable hardware. In VR specifically, standards recommend 90-120 fps to minimize motion sickness by closely matching the fluidity of natural head movements, as lower rates can exacerbate sensory mismatches leading to nausea. For instance, comparing 24 fps to 120 fps reveals substantial differences: at 120 fps, frame delivery time is approximately 8.3 ms versus 41.7 ms at 24 fps, resulting in reduced input lag and smoother motion perception, which is critical for competitive gaming and VR experiences.
In video games and real-time simulations, frame rate targets are established to ensure smooth interactivity and responsiveness, with 60 frames per second (fps) serving as the standard for console gaming, including on the PlayStation 5 (PS5). This benchmark balances visual fidelity and performance, allowing developers to prioritize stable gameplay in performance modes without excessive hardware demands. On personal computers (PCs), higher targets of 120 fps or more are common for users with high-refresh-rate monitors (120144 Hz or higher), enabling fluid motion in competitive titles and reducing input lag for enhanced player control. Vertical synchronization (V-Sync) is frequently employed to align the game's frame rate with the display's refresh rate, preventing screen tearing by buffering frames, though it may introduce minor latency if the target exceeds the monitor's capabilities.
Higher frame rates in PC gaming provide significant benefits by improving motion smoothness, reducing perceived latency, and enhancing overall immersion, particularly in fast-paced environments. CPU and GPU reviews typically compare and rank the performance of reviewed devices against other currently available popular hardware by benchmarking frame rates achieved in demanding scenarios, such as rendering complex scenes in AAA titles, to assess relative capabilities for sustained high-fps output.
Assuming a PC monitor capable of up to 144 Hz refresh rate, the user experience difference between 144 fps and a lower rate like 60 fps is substantial, with 144 fps delivering noticeably smoother visuals, lower input lag (approximately 7 ms frame delivery time versus 16 ms at 60 fps), and improved responsiveness in dynamic, fast-paced scenarios, making gameplay feel more reactive and less choppy.
In typical AAA games, such as first-person shooters or open-world adventures, a faster fps makes a perceptible difference by enhancing player reaction times, reducing motion blur, and increasing enjoyment through greater fluidity and immersion, without the stutter or lag often experienced at lower rates; studies confirm that higher frame rates directly improve player performance and quality of experience in these contexts.
Maintaining consistent frame rates presents significant challenges, particularly frame time variance, which measures inconsistencies in the duration required to render each frame and often results in perceptible stutter even when average fps remains stable. For instance, spikes in frame time can disrupt smooth motion, making gameplay feel choppy despite an overall 60 fps average. Advanced rendering techniques like ray tracing exacerbate these issues by increasing computational load; at launch in December 2020, Cyberpunk 2077's ray-traced modes on consoles such as the PS5 and Xbox Series X targeted 30 fps in quality modes to accommodate the intensive lighting and reflection calculations, leading to noticeable performance trade-offs compared to non-ray-traced performance modes at 60 fps.
In virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) simulations, frame rate requirements are more stringent to mitigate motion sickness, with a minimum of 90120 fps recommended to minimize sensory conflicts between visual cues and vestibular feedback. Studies indicate that 120 fps represents a critical threshold, significantly reducing simulator sickness symptoms like nausea compared to 60 or 90 fps, as higher rates better replicate natural head movement perception. To achieve these targets on varied hardware, adaptive quality scaling dynamically adjusts rendering resolution or graphical details in real-time, scaling down during demanding scenes to maintain frame rates and scaling up when resources allow, thereby optimizing immersion without compromising user comfort.
A pivotal advancement in addressing frame rate limitations is NVIDIA's Deep Learning Super Sampling (DLSS), introduced in 2018, which leverages AI-driven upscaling to boost fps while preserving image quality. By rendering at lower internal resolutions and using tensor core-accelerated neural networks to reconstruct higher-resolution frames, DLSS enables ray-traced games to reach 60120 fps on mid-range hardware, reducing the performance penalty of real-time effects without perceptible quality loss.

Technical Enhancements

Frame Rate Conversion Overview

Frame rate conversion becomes necessary when content captured or produced at one frame rate must be adapted for distribution or playback on systems operating at a different rate, such as transferring 24 frames per second (fps) film footage to 29.97 fps NTSC broadcast television. This mismatch arises from historical standards where film aimed for cinematic motion at 24 fps, while analog television required higher rates to accommodate interlaced scanning and color subcarrier signals. In modern contexts, real-time up-conversion is common in smart televisions to match incoming signals, like 24 fps content, to the display's native refresh rate, such as 60 Hz, ensuring compatibility without playback interruptions.
Basic methods for frame rate conversion include frame duplication for up-conversion and decimation for down-conversion. In up-conversion, such as from 24 fps to 29.97 fps for NTSC, techniques like 3:2 pulldown duplicate frames in a repeating patternthree frames from the source become two fields, and the next two become threeto fill the target rate without altering playback speed. For down-conversion, decimation involves selectively dropping frames to reduce the rate, preserving synchronization by removing redundant or interpolated ones while minimizing motion discontinuity.
In digital video file transcoding, changing the frame rate of an existing video while preserving the original duration and playback speed requires inserting additional frames when up-converting. It is not possible to increase the frame rate significantly (for example, from 8 fps to 60 fps) without re-encoding if the original duration and speed must be maintained, as this necessitates generating new frames, typically through duplication of existing ones. Modifying only the frame rate metadata without re-encoding (e.g., ffmpeg -i input.mp4 -c:v copy -r 60) retains the original number of frames and causes the video to play faster with a shortened duration (7.5 times faster for an 8 fps source to 60 fps target). To preserve duration and speed, re-encoding is required, and frame duplication can be performed using tools such as FFmpeg's fps filter. To avoid any quality loss from re-encoding, a lossless codec should be used. An example command using lossless H.264 encoding is:
ffmpeg -i input.mp4 -vf fps=60 -c:v libx264 -qp 0 -preset veryslow output.mp4
This duplicates frames approximately 7.5 times per original frame on average (since 60/8 = 7.5) to achieve 60 fps while encoding losslessly.
Poor frame rate conversion can introduce artifacts like judder, a stuttering effect from uneven frame repetition or mismatched timing, particularly noticeable in panning shots. Conversely, matching the native frame rate during playback eliminates such issues, delivering smoother motion and preserving the intended aesthetic, as seen when avoiding pulldown in progressive displays.
In practical applications, Blu-ray players often handle 24p output directly for film content, outputting at 24 fps when connected to compatible displays to bypass conversion artifacts. Streaming services like Netflix enforce standards such as 23.976 fps for cinematic deliveries, ensuring consistent frame rates across devices and reducing conversion needs during encoding and playback.

Interpolation and Motion Compensation Methods

Frame interpolation techniques form the core of many frame rate up-conversion algorithms, aiming to synthesize intermediate frames between existing ones to increase temporal resolution. Simple linear blending, the most basic method, generates new frames by averaging the pixels of adjacent input frames, such as creating a midpoint frame as $ I_t = \frac{I_{t-1} + I_{t+1}}{2} $, where $ I_t $ is the interpolated frame at time $ t $. This approach is computationally efficient but often results in motion blurring and artifacts in scenes with significant movement, as it assumes no pixel displacement between frames.
In contrast, optical flow estimation provides a more sophisticated interpolation by computing dense motion vectors that describe pixel trajectories across frames, enabling accurate warping and synthesis of intermediate content. Optical flow methods, such as those in Real-Time Intermediate Flow Estimation (RIFE), estimate bidirectional flows between input frames and use them to generate non-linearly interpolated frames, supporting arbitrary timesteps without relying on pre-trained models. Under a linear motion assumption, the displacement vector for an intermediate frame can be approximated as $ \vec{d} = \frac{\vec{p}{next} - \vec{p}{current}}{\Delta t} $, where $ \vec{p} $ represents pixel positions and $ \Delta t $ is the time interval, allowing pixels to be back-projected to their origins for synthesis. This flow-based approach significantly reduces blurring compared to linear blending, particularly in dynamic sequences.
Motion compensation enhances interpolation by explicitly accounting for object displacements through block-matching algorithms, which divide frames into blocks and search for best-matching blocks in reference frames to derive motion vectors. In frame rate up-conversion, block matching, as detailed in early motion-compensated methods, minimizes a cost function like sum of absolute differences (SAD) to find vectors, then compensates by shifting blocks to form interpolated frames, improving accuracy over global averaging. These algorithms are foundational in video processing standards and are often refined with multi-resolution searches to handle varying motion scales.
Hybrid methods integrate optical flow estimation with pixel synthesis and block-based compensation to address limitations of individual techniques, such as occlusions or complex deformations. For instance, frameworks like those in comprehensive video frame interpolation surveys combine dense flow fields for fine-grained motion with synthesis modules that blend warped pixels, using techniques like adaptive weighting to resolve conflicts in overlapping regions. This hybrid paradigm, seen in bidirectional flow networks, yields smoother interpolations by leveraging flow for guidance and direct pixel generation for refinement.
Practical implementations of these methods appear in consumer electronics, such as TrimensionDN's Digital Natural Motion (DNM) technology in televisions, which employs flow-based estimation to interpolate frames and reduce judder in 24 fps content displayed at 60 fps. More recently, AI-driven tools like Topaz Video AI (as of 2025) utilize neural networks for up-conversion, estimating optical flows and synthesizing frames to achieve 60 fps or higher from lower-rate sources, with capabilities for up to 2000% slow-motion effects while preserving detail.
AI upscaling and frame interpolation have significant impacts on frame rates in digital media and gaming. In video production and playback, AI frame interpolation generates intermediate frames to boost effective FPS, enabling smoother motion from low-frame-rate sources and supporting high-quality slow-motion effects, which enhances viewer experience in streaming and editing applications. However, drawbacks include potential artifacts such as ghosting or unnatural motion, especially in scenes with rapid changes or occlusions. In gaming, technologies like NVIDIA's DLSS (Deep Learning Super Sampling) use AI for resolution upscaling and frame generation, rendering at lower internal resolutions to achieve higher frame ratesoften doubling or quadrupling FPSwhile maintaining visual fidelity, benefiting performance on varied hardware. Despite these advantages, DLSS can introduce visual artifacts or loss of fine details, particularly at lower base resolutions, potentially resulting in less natural imagery.
Quality assessment in these methods commonly relies on metrics like Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), which quantifies reconstruction fidelity by comparing interpolated frames to ground-truth high-rate sequences, with higher values (e.g., >30 dB) indicating better preservation of luminance and structure. However, limitations persist, particularly ghosting artifacts in complex scenes involving occlusions or rapid changes, where mismatched motion vectors cause duplicated or faded edges, as observed in perception-oriented interpolation studies. These issues highlight the need for advanced handling of non-linear motions in hybrid approaches.

High Frame Rate Formats

High frame rate (HFR) formats refer to video capture and display technologies operating at 48 frames per second (fps) or higher, primarily to minimize motion blur and enhance clarity in dynamic scenes compared to standard 24 or 30 fps rates. This approach captures more images per second, allowing for smoother perceived motion, particularly beneficial in fast-paced content where traditional rates can introduce artifacts like strobing or judder.
A landmark in HFR adoption was the 2012 theatrical release of The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, directed by Peter Jackson and filmed at 48 fps in 3D, which ignited widespread debate on its hyper-realistic "soap opera" aesthetic versus traditional cinematic warmth. Despite mixed reception, the format demonstrated potential for immersive viewing in action-heavy narratives. In sports broadcasting, HFR has been trialed at 120 fps to capture rapid movements, such as in Olympic events to improve live coverage and slow-motion replays of athletics and aquatics.
Specialized HFR formats include Dolby Vision, which supports 120 fps playback for enhanced HDR content in gaming and video, enabling vibrant colors and fluid motion on compatible devices. In virtual reality (VR), standards for headsets like Meta Quest target refresh rates of 90-120 Hz (as of 2025) to prevent motion sickness and ensure responsive immersion during head-tracked experiences. By 2025, consumer televisions have integrated 8K resolution at 120 fps, as seen in Samsung's Neo QLED models, which leverage mini-LED backlighting for sharp, high-motion visuals in home entertainment.
These formats offer advantages like superior smoothness in action sequences, reducing visual fatigue for viewers of sports or simulations, but face adoption hurdles due to increased data demands. For instance, transmitting 4K or 8K HFR requires substantial bandwidth, often necessitating HDMI 2.1 interfaces with up to 48 Gbps throughput to avoid compression artifacts or compatibility issues.

References

Frame Rate - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

What is frame rate and why does it matter in movie making? - Adobe

Why 24 frames per second is still the gold standard for film

Understanding Standards: Time Code - SMPTE

Frame rate versus Shutter speed - Axis Communications

Frame Rate vs. Refresh Rate: What's the Difference? - ViewSonic

Making Film Music (Part One) - The Cambridge Companion to Film ...

Time code for 23.976 / (23.98) frames per second video

Guide to Standard HD Digital Video Measurements - Tektronix

Scope-Trigger: Effortless Video Signal Analysis - Extron

MediaInfo - MediaArea

ffprobe Documentation - FFmpeg

Forensic analysis of video file formats - ScienceDirect.com

 Speed Analysis From Video: A Method For Determining a Range in ...

Finding Frames per Second of a Video File | Baeldung on Linux

FFprobeTips - FFmpeg Wiki

The Persistence of Vision - Vision.org

Critical Flicker Fusion Frequency: A Narrative Review - PMC - NIH

High Frame Rates and Human Vision: A View Through the Window ...

Scientists discover speed of visual perception ranges widely in ...

 Purkinje'S Vision: The Dawning of Neuroscience - Monoskop

Temporal Resolution - Webvision - NCBI Bookshelf - NIH

Temporal vision: measures, mechanisms and meaning

Visibility of Motion Blur and Strobing Artefacts in Video at 100 ...

Robert W. Paul Films and Technology: Part Seven. That annoying ...

What Is the 180-Degree Shutter Rule And Why It Matters

Why the 180-degree shutter rule can, & should, be broken

Shutter Angle In Cinematography Explained - In Depth Cine

Predicting Perception of the Wagon Wheel Illusion | Phys. Rev. Lett.

Shutter | National Film and Sound Archive of Australia

LED Screens - Flicker Sense

Evidence that Viewers Prefer Higher Frame-Rate Film

Kinetograph | Definition, History, & Facts - Britannica

Thomas Edison's Kinetoscope -- a forerunner of projected motion ...

Projection and Wide Film (1895-1930) - In 70mm

History of film - Edison, Lumiere Bros, Cinematography | Britannica

 FILM PRESERVATION FIAF

The Fi Hall of Fame: Hacking Film - Why 24 Frames Per Second?

The Surprisingly Fascinating World of Frame Rates - PremiumBeat

 History of Sound Motion Pictures by Edward W Kellogg

Technicolor Successive Exposure(c.1935c.1973) - FILM ATLAS

CinemaScope(19521967) - FILM ATLAS

Why Are Movies 24 FPS The Cinematic Frame Rate Explained

The Reason Why Many Found The Hobbit At 48 FPS An ... - Forbes

Expert Guide to the Best Frame Rate for Slow Motion

Mixing Frame Rates in DaVinci Resolve - Part 1: Know Thy Frame rate

How to Change Frame Rate in DaVinci Resolve (Tutorial)

'Avatar: The Way of Water' is the first great high frame rate movie

Fan Question: Do you hand draw every scene? | News - South Park

What Does Animating on Ones, Twos & Threes Mean?

Autodesk Maya - Character Animation Part 1 - STYLY

Did your friend say what frame rate Pixar uses for its animated films?

What framerate was Wall-E created in? : r/Pixar - Reddit

The Impact of Frame Rate on Different Animation Styles (24fps vs ...

Electronic shutter, rolling shutter and flash: what you need to know

Sony announces a9 III: World's first full-frame global shutter camera

Best 8K and 6K camera in 2025: High-resolution video cameras are ...

 ALEXA 35 brochure - ARRI

https://gopro.com/en/us/shop/cameras/learn/hero13black/CHDHX-131-master.html

iPhone 15 and iPhone 15 Plus - Technical Specifications - Apple (AM)

https://connect.na.panasonic.com/av/video/camcorders/handheld-ag-cx350

Global Animation Options - SideFX

 Recent Advances in Adaptive Sampling and Reconstruction for ...

3D Render Time Calculator

Polygon count, shaders and render times

Animation performance and frame rate - MDN Web Docs - Mozilla

60 FPS: Performant web animations for optimal UX - Algolia Blog

https://www.steinberg.help/r/nuendo/13.0/en/cubase_nuendo/topics/film_transfers/film_transfers_video_pullup_and_pulldown_c.html

29.97 Things You Didn't Know About Frame Rates

Why A High Frame Rate TV Can't Fix Cinematic Motion - RTINGS.com

What Is 3:2 Pulldown? - Extron

Working with frame rate conversion - MediaConvert

Native Frame Rate Playback - Netflix TechBlog

What is the difference between 1080/24p and 1080/60p output ...

VFX Media Review - Delivery Specifications

Real-Time Intermediate Flow Estimation for Video Frame Interpolation

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1595419

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8785036

Smooth Operator | Sound & Vision

https://www.topazlabs.com/learn/ultimate-guide-to-60-fps-frame-rate-conversion

Frame rate up-conversion in cardiac ultrasound - ScienceDirect.com

High Frame Rate Video Playback - RED cameras

What is HFR cinema? - Beverly Boy Productions

Will "The Hobbit" Start A 48 FPS Movie Revolution? - Fast Company

Are we past 'Peak 4K'? - FlatpanelsHD

Dolby Vision HDR: everything you need to know - What Hi-Fi?

Guidelines for VR Performance Optimization - Meta for Developers

The Best 8k TV of 2025 - RTINGS.com

HDMI 2.1 Explained Everything You Need to Know - ViewSonic

What Is HDMI 2.1?: An Overview - RTINGS.com

MSI Support: How to deal with low FPS and less-than-expected performance

60 FPS vs 144 FPS: Does Higher FPS Actually Matter?

Why Does High FPS Matter For Esports? | GeForce News - NVIDIA

The Effects of Frame Rate and Resolution on Users Playing First Person Shooter Games

The Effects of Frame Rate Variation on Game Player Quality of Experience

FPSSeer: Visual analysis of game frame rate data

Frame Rate - Everything You Need To Know

Frame Rate definition and description

Guidelines for VR Performance Optimization

AI Frame Interpolation Boost FPS & Smooth Transitions

How Does AI Upscaling Really Work? Models, Benefits & Limitations

DLSS 4: Transforming Real-Time Graphics with AI

Frames Per Second Comparison Demo

TestUFO Frame Rates Demo

Vet explains how cats and dogs see and hear after viral simulation

Why do cats watch TV?

FFmpeg Filters Documentation - fps filter

FFmpeg Wiki - Encode/H.264 - Lossless
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion