FreeRTOS Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
FreeRTOS
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 FreeRTOS is a real-time operating system (RTOS) kernel designed for microcontrollers and small microprocessors, providing essential functionality for embedded applications with strict timing requirements. It features a small memory footprint, enabling efficient operation on resource-constrained devices. Distributed under the permissive MIT open source license, FreeRTOS supports over 40 processor architectures, including ARM Cortex-M, RISC-V, and AVR, and is compatible with more than 15 toolchains. Its core components include preemptive priority-based task scheduling, inter-task communication primitives such as queues, semaphores, and mutexes, as well as software timers and event groups for synchronization.
Developed by Richard Barry and first released in 2003, FreeRTOS quickly gained popularity for its portability, reliability, and ease of integration into embedded projects. Initially maintained by Real Time Engineers Ltd., the project saw stewardship transferred to Amazon Web Services (AWS) in late 2017, under which it has received ongoing enhancements, including support for symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) and integration with AWS IoT services. The current stable version is 11.2.0 (March 2025). Today, FreeRTOS is a de facto standard in the embedded industry, downloaded every 170 seconds on average and trusted by leading semiconductor companies and device manufacturers across sectors like automotive, consumer electronics, and industrial automation.
Beyond the kernel, FreeRTOS includes a suite of open-source libraries implementing standards for connectivity (e.g., TCP/IP with IPv6 support), security (e.g., TLS and device shadowing), and over-the-air (OTA) updates, all optimized for low-power IoT edge devices. It emphasizes deterministic behavior, with features like tickless low-power modes to extend battery life, and undergoes rigorous testing, including certifications for security standards such as SESIP Level 2 and PSA Level 1. Long-term support (LTS) releases provide at least two years of bug fixes and security updates, ensuring stability for production deployments.

Introduction

Overview

FreeRTOS is a market-leading real-time operating system (RTOS) kernel designed specifically for microcontrollers and small microprocessors in embedded systems. It provides essential services such as multitasking, scheduling, inter-task communication, and memory management, enabling developers to create deterministic applications that meet strict timing requirements in resource-constrained environments. Unlike general-purpose operating systems, FreeRTOS prioritizes low overhead and predictability, making it ideal for applications in IoT devices, industrial controls, automotive systems, and consumer electronics where real-time performance is critical.
The kernel's architecture emphasizes simplicity and portability, supporting over 40 processor architectures, including ARM Cortex-M, RISC-V, and MIPS, with a minimal memory footprint often under 10 KB for core functionality. It implements a preemptive priority-based scheduler that ensures higher-priority tasks execute promptly, while offering features like mutexes, semaphores, and queues for synchronization and data exchange between tasks. FreeRTOS has gained widespread adoption due to its reliability, extensive community support, and integration with development tools from vendors like STMicroelectronics and NXP.
Distributed freely as open-source software under the permissive MIT license, FreeRTOS allows modification and commercial use without royalties, though optional long-term support (LTS) releases and safety certifications (such as IEC 61508 SIL 3 and ISO 26262 ASIL D) are available for mission-critical applications. Since its acquisition by Amazon Web Services in 2017, FreeRTOS has evolved to include cloud connectivity libraries, enhancing its role in edge-to-cloud IoT ecosystems while maintaining backward compatibility for legacy projects.

Licensing and Availability

FreeRTOS is distributed under the MIT open source license, which permits users to freely use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and sell copies of the software, subject to including the copyright notice and permission notice in all copies or substantial portions of the software. This permissive license has no royalty or other fees associated with its use, making it suitable for both commercial and non-commercial applications without requiring disclosure of source code modifications.
The FreeRTOS kernel and associated libraries are available for free download from the official website, freertos.org, where users can access the latest releases, pre-configured demos, and documentation. It supports over 40 microcontroller architectures, including ARM Cortex-M, RISC-V, and others, along with more than 15 compiler toolchains, enabling broad portability across embedded systems. Long-term support (LTS) versions provide two years of updates and bug fixes, ensuring stability for production deployments.
For users requiring commercial licensing and indemnification, Wittenstein High Integrity Systems offers OPENRTOS, a commercially licensed variant based on FreeRTOS with additional support services. For safety certifications such as IEC 61508 SIL 3 and ISO 26262 ASIL D, they provide SAFERTOS, a certified derivative compatible with the open-source kernel.

History

Origins and Early Development

FreeRTOS originated from the work of Richard Barry, who began developing the kernel in 2002 as a lightweight, open-source real-time operating system (RTOS) for embedded applications. Barry founded the project through his company, Real Time Engineers Ltd., with the goal of providing a simple and portable alternative to commercial RTOS options that were often overly complex or resource-intensive for small-scale devices. The initial focus was on creating a kernel that could run on microcontrollers with limited memory and processing power, emphasizing ease of use and broad compiler compatibility.
Early development prioritized core functionality, including preemptive priority-based task scheduling and basic inter-task communication mechanisms such as queues and semaphores. The kernel was structured to be highly modular, allowing developers to port it to different hardware architectures by implementing architecture-specific code. Initial ports targeted popular 8- and 16-bit microcontrollers, with the codebase kept under 10,000 lines to ensure maintainability and minimal footprinttypically resulting in binaries smaller than 10 KB. By 2003, the first public version was released under a permissive open-source license (GPL with a static linking exception), enabling its integration into both open and proprietary projects without licensing fees.
In its formative years, FreeRTOS evolved through community feedback and Barry's iterative improvements, addressing key challenges in embedded real-time systems. Early versions utilized a memory pool allocation scheme for dynamic memory management, which provided predictable allocation times suitable for real-time constraints but was later supplemented with configurable heap implementations for greater flexibility. This period saw rapid expansion in supported platforms, growing from a handful of initial ports to over a dozen architectures by the mid-2000s, laying the foundation for its widespread adoption in consumer electronics, industrial controls, and IoT prototypes.

Acquisition by AWS and Modern Evolution

In November 2017, Amazon Web Services (AWS) assumed stewardship of the FreeRTOS project from its original maintainer, Real Time Engineers Ltd., with founder Richard Barry joining AWS as a principal engineer to guide its ongoing development. This transition marked a pivotal shift, as AWS launched Amazon FreeRTOS as an extension of the core open-source kernel, incorporating AWS-specific libraries to facilitate secure connectivity for microcontroller-based IoT devices. The kernel itself remained freely available under the permissive MIT license, ensuring continued open-source accessibility while enabling seamless integration with AWS IoT services.
Post-acquisition, FreeRTOS evolved into a more comprehensive IoT operating system, emphasizing modularity and cloud-native features to address the growing demands of edge computing. Key enhancements included the addition of over-the-air (OTA) update capabilities through the AWS IoT Jobs service, allowing remote firmware deployments without manual intervention, and built-in support for mutual TLS authentication to bolster device security. These developments simplified the deployment of billions of low-power devices, with Amazon FreeRTOS providing pre-integrated libraries for MQTT messaging, device shadows, and data encryption, all optimized for resource-constrained environments. By 2018, initial ports and demos were expanded to support major microcontroller vendors like Texas Instruments and Microchip, accelerating adoption in industrial and consumer IoT applications.
Under AWS management, FreeRTOS has seen sustained innovation through regular releases and long-term support initiatives. The kernel advanced to version 11.2.0 in March 2025, introducing refinements in multi-core scheduling, improved interrupt handling, and enhanced portability across over 40 architectures, from ARM Cortex-M to RISC-V. In October 2025, the FreeRTOS Long-Term Support (LTS) libraries were updated to version 202406.xx, offering extended maintenance patches for critical components like TCP/IP stacks and secure sockets, thereby minimizing vulnerabilities and ensuring stability for production systems over multi-year deployments. Security remains a focal point, with ongoing patches addressing high-severity issues in the kernel and libraries, such as a critical FreeRTOS+TCP vulnerability resolved in June 2024. As of late 2025, FreeRTOS powers a vast ecosystem of embedded devices, with AWS continuing to invest in its roadmap for features like advanced analytics at the edge and deeper integration with services like AWS Greengrass.

Implementation

Kernel Architecture

The FreeRTOS kernel is a compact, real-time operating system kernel designed for embedded microcontrollers, emphasizing efficiency, determinism, and minimal resource usage. It employs a preemptive priority-based scheduler that ensures higher-priority tasks execute before lower-priority ones, supporting up to 32 configurable priority levels to facilitate real-time responsiveness. The kernel's architecture is modular, separating architecture-independent core logic from hardware-specific adaptations, which enables portability across over 40 processor architectures. This design prioritizes simplicity, with the entire kernel typically compiling to a binary size of 4,000 to 9,000 bytes, making it suitable for resource-constrained environments.
At its core, the kernel is implemented in just three primary source files that form the foundation of its functionality: tasks.c, which manages task creation, suspension, deletion, and the scheduler; queue.c, which implements inter-task communication primitives such as queues, semaphores, and mutexes; and list.c, which provides doubly-linked list data structures used extensively for ready lists, delayed task lists, and queue management. These files contain the portable, architecture-agnostic portions of the kernel, ensuring that the bulk of the logic remains consistent across ports. Optional modules, such as timers.c for software timers and croutine.c for co-routines, can be included to extend capabilities without altering the core structure. The kernel operates in a single address space, integrating all services directly, which contributes to its low overhead and predictable behavior in interrupt-driven environments.
Portability is achieved through a dedicated port layer, organized in the portable directory under subfolders for each compiler and architecture (e.g., GCC/ARM_CM4F). This layer includes port.c for assembly or C implementations of critical functions like context switching, interrupt management, and stack initialization, alongside portmacro.h for architecture-specific macros defining stack growth direction, interrupt priorities, and critical section entry/exit. Configuration is further customized via FreeRTOSConfig.h, allowing users to enable or disable features like preemption, tickless idle mode for power savings, or symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) support for multi-core systems. This separation ensures that porting involves minimal changes, primarily to the port layer, while preserving the kernel's deterministic scheduling and synchronization primitives. Recent enhancements include static memory allocation options, eliminating runtime heap usage for safety-critical applications.

Task Management

In FreeRTOS, tasks represent the fundamental units of execution within an application, functioning as lightweight threads managed by the kernel scheduler. Each task operates independently with its own execution context, including a dedicated stack for storing local variables, function parameters, and CPU registers during context switches. The kernel ensures that only one task executes on a single-core processor at any given time, swapping tasks in and out based on priority and state to achieve deterministic behavior suitable for real-time systems.
Tasks are created dynamically using the xTaskCreate API function, which allocates memory for the task control block (TCB) and stack from the heap (or statically if using xTaskCreateStatic). The function signature is:
BaseType_t xTaskCreate( TaskFunction_t pxTaskCode,
 const char * const pcName,
 const configSTACK_DEPTH_TYPE usStackDepth,
 void * const pvParameters,
 UBaseType_t uxPriority,
 TaskHandle_t * const pxCreatedTask );
Here, pxTaskCode points to the task's entry function, pcName provides a descriptive string (up to configMAX_TASK_NAME_LEN characters), usStackDepth specifies the stack size in words, pvParameters passes data to the task, and uxPriority sets the initial priority (ranging from 0 for the lowest to configMAX_PRIORITIES - 1 for the highest). Upon success, it returns pdPASS and optionally a TaskHandle_t handle via pxCreatedTask for later reference; failure returns errCOULD_NOT_ALLOCATE_REQUIRED_MEMORY. Tasks must be created before the scheduler starts via vTaskStartScheduler.
FreeRTOS tasks can exist in one of five states: Running, Ready, Blocked, Suspended, or Deleted, with the kernel managing transitions to ensure efficient resource use and responsiveness. A task enters the Running state when it is actively executing on the processor; on single-core systems, only one task can be Running at a time. The Ready state indicates a task is eligible to run but yields to a higher-priority Running task, placed in a priority-based ready list for quick selection. In the Blocked state, a task awaits an event (such as a queue or semaphore) or a time delay, consuming no CPU time and including a configurable timeout; upon expiration or event occurrence, it moves to Ready if its priority allows. The Suspended state explicitly halts a task indefinitely without timeout, often for power saving or debugging, requiring manual resumption. Finally, the Deleted state occurs post-termination, freeing the TCB and stack (if dynamic allocation was used). Transitions are triggered by API calls, interrupts, or scheduler decisions, with the eTaskGetState function querying a task's current state (enabled via INCLUDE_eTaskGetState in FreeRTOSConfig.h).
Task priorities drive management decisions, with higher numerical values indicating higher urgency (e.g., priority 0 for the idle task). The kernel uses fixed-priority preemptive scheduling, ensuring the highest-priority Ready or Running task always executes, while equal-priority tasks may share time via round-robin if configUSE_TIME_SLICING is enabled. Priorities can be queried with uxTaskPriorityGet or changed via vTaskPrioritySet, but alterations require caution to avoid disrupting real-time guarantees. For resource contention, mutexes support basic priority inheritance to mitigate inversion, temporarily boosting a low-priority task's effective priority to match a blocked higher-priority one.
Key control functions enable runtime management. Delays are implemented with vTaskDelay(xTicksToDelay), which blocks the calling task (typically NULL for self) for at least the specified ticks relative to the call time, or vTaskDelayUntil for periodic execution at fixed intervals, both leveraging the system tick interrupt for precision. Suspension via vTaskSuspend(xTaskToSuspend) moves a task to the Suspended state, preventing scheduling until vTaskResume(xTaskToResume) restores it to Ready (if not Blocked). Deletion with vTaskDelete(xTaskToDelete) removes a task from all kernel lists, cleans up resources, and transfers control to the highest-priority Ready task; calling with NULL self-deletes the current task, though this should be the last action in the task function to avoid undefined behavior. Stack usage can be monitored using the uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark(TaskHandle_t xTask) function, which must be enabled by defining INCLUDE_uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark as 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h. It returns the minimum amount of remaining stack space (in words) that has been available to the task since its creation, queried for the current task by passing NULL or for another task by passing its handle. This aids developers in detecting near-overflow conditions and optimizing task stack sizes by monitoring the value during runtime testing and reducing the allocated stack if sufficient headroom is consistently observed. Handles (TaskHandle_t) reference tasks for these operations, obtained at creation or via functions like xTaskGetCurrentTaskHandle. All APIs require appropriate config options (e.g., INCLUDE_vTaskDelayUntil) and are thread-safe except where noted.

Scheduling and Synchronization

FreeRTOS employs a fixed-priority preemptive scheduling algorithm as its core mechanism for task management, ensuring that the highest-priority ready task executes immediately upon becoming runnable, preempting any lower-priority tasks in progress. This approach supports real-time requirements by minimizing latency for critical tasks, with task priorities ranging from 0 (lowest) to configMAX_PRIORITIES - 1 (highest), configurable at compile time. Preemption is enabled by default via the configUSE_PREEMPTION macro; when disabled, the kernel operates in cooperative mode, where tasks yield control voluntarily using functions like taskYIELD(). For tasks of equal priority, round-robin time-slicing can be applied, cycling execution every tick period if configUSE_TIME_SLICING is set to 1, promoting fairness without compromising determinism.
In single-core configurations, the scheduler maintains a ready list sorted by priority, selecting the highest-priority task for execution during each context switch, typically triggered by tick interrupts, task delays, or blocking calls. Asymmetric multiprocessing (AMP) extends this by running independent FreeRTOS instances on separate cores, each with its own scheduler, allowing isolated execution but requiring explicit inter-core communication for coordination. Symmetric multiprocessing (SMP), introduced in FreeRTOS version 11.0.0, utilizes a single kernel instance to schedule tasks across multiple cores, enabling concurrent execution of tasks from different priority levelsone per corewhile supporting core affinity to pin tasks to specific cores via vTaskCoreAffinitySet(). This SMP model enhances throughput on multicore hardware without altering the fundamental priority-based algorithm.
Synchronization in FreeRTOS is achieved through lightweight primitives designed for embedded constraints, primarily semaphores, mutexes, queues, and event groups, which facilitate inter-task communication and resource protection. Binary semaphores serve as signaling mechanisms, allowing a task or interrupt to "give" the semaphore (setting it to available) to unblock a waiting task that "takes" it, ideal for event-driven synchronization such as notifying a task of peripheral activity. Unlike binary semaphores, counting semaphores maintain a counter to track multiple instances of an event or resource, incrementing on "give" and decrementing on "take," with the initial count reflecting available resources or pending events.
Mutexes, implemented as binary semaphores with priority inheritance, prevent priority inversion by temporarily boosting the priority of a low-priority task holding the mutex if a higher-priority task attempts to acquire it, ensuring bounded blocking times. This inheritance mechanism releases the boost only after the mutex is freed, simplifying implementation while avoiding unbounded inversion chains. Queues provide buffered inter-task communication, acting as both synchronization points (tasks block until data is available or space exists) and data conduits, with optional priority inheritance for mutex-like behavior. Event groups enable efficient multi-bit flag synchronization, allowing tasks to wait for combinations of events using xEventGroupWaitBits() or synchronize multiple tasks at a rendezvous point via xEventGroupSync(), where each task sets its bit and waits for all others, optimizing for scenarios like coordinated startup sequences. All primitives support interrupt-safe variants (e.g., xSemaphoreGiveFromISR()) to handle asynchronous events without disabling interrupts for extended periods.

Memory Management

FreeRTOS employs dynamic memory allocation to provision resources for kernel objects such as tasks, queues, mutexes, and semaphores, drawing from a dedicated heap managed by the kernel itself. This approach allows flexibility in resource usage but introduces considerations like fragmentation and determinism, which are critical in real-time embedded systems. The kernel provides five distinct heap implementation schemeslabeled heap_1 through heap_5each varying in complexity, features, and suitability for different applications. Additionally, FreeRTOS supports static memory allocation as an alternative to enhance predictability, configurable via options in the FreeRTOSConfig.h header file.
The choice between static and dynamic allocation is controlled by the configuration parameters configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION and configSUPPORT_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION, which can be enabled independently or together. Static allocation pre-allocates memory for kernel objects at compile time, ensuring deterministic behavior and avoiding runtime allocation failures, but it may increase the overall memory footprint. Dynamic allocation, in contrast, uses the heap for on-demand memory requests via functions like pvPortMalloc() and vPortFree(), reducing waste in systems with variable resource needs but risking fragmentation over time. For kernel objects, dynamic allocation is the default, where creating a task with xTaskCreate() or a queue with xQueueCreate() internally calls pvPortMalloc() to obtain the necessary memory blocks.
The five heap schemes differ primarily in their handling of allocation, deallocation, fragmentation, and determinism, as summarized in the following table:
SchemeAllocation MethodDeallocation SupportFragmentation HandlingDeterminismKey Use Cases and Limitations
heap_1Subdivides a contiguous array of size configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE using a simple next-fit approach.None (vPortFree() is a no-op).None, as no freeing occurs.Fully deterministic; allocation time is constant.Ideal for small, simple systems where tasks and objects are never deleted; lacks flexibility for dynamic lifecycles.
heap_2Best-fit search within the same contiguous array as heap_1.Supported, but without coalescing adjacent free blocks.High risk due to no merging of freed blocks, leading to external fragmentation.Non-deterministic due to search overhead.Rarely recommended; superseded by heap_4 for systems needing basic freeing, but fragmentation limits long-term use.
heap_3Wraps the standard C library's malloc() and free(), with thread safety achieved by suspending the scheduler during calls.Fully supported via free().Depends on the underlying malloc() implementation; often prone to fragmentation.Non-deterministic, as it relies on compiler-specific library behavior.Suitable for porting existing code or when standard library integration is needed; heap size is linker-defined, not configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE. Avoid in strict real-time scenarios due to variability.
heap_4First-fit algorithm on a contiguous array, similar to heap_1/2.Supported, with coalescing of adjacent free blocks on free.Reduced through block merging, though external fragmentation can still occur.Mostly deterministic but allocation time varies with list traversal.Recommended for most dynamic allocation needs; faster than standard malloc() and balances efficiency with fragmentation control.
heap_5Extends heap_4 with support for multiple non-contiguous memory regions, initialized via vPortDefineHeapRegions().Supported, with coalescing within each region.Handled per region, similar to heap_4; no cross-region coalescing.Similar to heap_4, with added initialization overhead.Best for systems with disjoint RAM areas (e.g., external memory); requires pre-defining regions in a HeapRegion_t array. Most feature-rich but complex to set up.
Each scheme is implemented in a separate source file (heap_n.c) within the FreeRTOS portable memory management directory, and only one is compiled into the application by including the corresponding file. Custom heap implementations are also possible by providing user-defined pvPortMalloc() and vPortFree() functions, allowing integration with proprietary allocators or hardware-specific memory controllers.
To monitor heap usage, FreeRTOS offers API functions such as xPortGetFreeHeapSize() for current free bytes (available in heap_1, 2, 4, and 5) and xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() for the lowest free level since boot (heap_4 and 5 only). More detailed statistics, including fragmentation metrics, are accessible via vPortGetHeapStats() in heap_4 and 5, populating a HeapStats_t structure. If an allocation fails, the optional vApplicationMallocFailedHook() callback can be implemented when configUSE_MALLOC_FAILED_HOOK is enabled, allowing custom error handling. For task stacks, applications can override allocation with pvPortMallocStack() and vPortFreeStack() macros to use specialized memory, such as faster SRAM.
Best practices emphasize selecting a heap scheme based on system requirements: heap_1 or static allocation for maximum determinism in safety-critical applications, heap_4 for general dynamic use, and heap_5 for complex memory topologies. Enabling configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW and tracking task memory with configTRACK_TASK_MEMORY_ALLOCATIONS further aids in preventing exhaustion. Fragmentation should be monitored in production, as repeated allocate-free cycles in heap_2 or 3 can lead to allocation failures despite sufficient total free memory.

Key Features

Real-Time Capabilities

FreeRTOS provides real-time capabilities through its priority-based preemptive scheduler, which ensures that higher-priority tasks execute before lower-priority ones, enabling predictable and timely responses in embedded systems. The scheduler operates on a fixed-priority model with up to 32 priority levels (configurable via configMAX_PRIORITIES), where the highest-priority ready task always runs, preempting lower-priority tasks immediately upon becoming ready. This preemption occurs not only through explicit yields but also via interrupt service routines (ISRs) that unblock higher-priority tasks, minimizing response times to critical events.
To maintain determinism, FreeRTOS avoids non-deterministic operations in time-critical paths, such as dynamic memory allocation during scheduling or ISR execution; instead, it supports static allocation of kernel objects to eliminate runtime heap fragmentation and variability. The system's tick interrupt, configurable via configTICK_RATE_HZ (typically 1000 Hz for a 1 ms resolution), provides the timing basis for delays, timeouts, and task switching, ensuring consistent periodicity without excessive overhead. Tickless idle mode further enhances power efficiency in low-activity periods by suppressing unnecessary ticks while preserving timing accuracy through functions like vTaskStepTick(). Priority inheritance in mutexes prevents unbounded priority inversion, where a low-priority task holding a resource could indefinitely block a high-priority one, thus upholding real-time guarantees.
Interrupt latency is optimized by categorizing interrupts into those that can safely call FreeRTOS APIs (below configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY) and higher-priority ones that execute without kernel interference, ensuring minimal disruption to real-time deadlines. ISR-safe APIs, such as xSemaphoreGiveFromISR(), allow interrupts to signal tasks efficiently, potentially triggering immediate context switches if a higher-priority task is unblocked, with the return value indicating the need for rescheduling. This design supports hard real-time applications by keeping scheduler overhead lowtypically just a few microseconds on common microcontrollersand avoiding time-slicing (configurable via configUSE_TIME_SLICING) for equal-priority tasks in strict scenarios to eliminate slicing-induced jitter. In symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) configurations, the scheduler extends these capabilities across cores, allowing concurrent execution of tasks at different priorities for scalable real-time performance.
Overall, FreeRTOS's real-time features emphasize simplicity and configurability, enabling developers to meet deadlines in resource-constrained environments like IoT devices and industrial controls, provided tasks are designed to block on events rather than busy-wait, preventing CPU waste and ensuring scalability.

Portability and Supported Architectures

FreeRTOS achieves high portability through a modular architecture that separates the core kernel functionality, written in standard ANSI C, from hardware-specific implementations. The kernel's portable layer contains architecture-independent code for task management, scheduling, and synchronization, while the port layer provides compiler- and processor-specific adaptations for critical operations such as context switching, interrupt handling, and data type definitions. This design allows developers to adapt FreeRTOS to new microcontrollers by implementing only the port layer, typically involving files like port.c and portmacro.h, without modifying the core source code.
The source code organization reinforces this portability: the portable layer resides in FreeRTOS/Source, encompassing files such as tasks.c, queue.c, and list.c that handle generic RTOS operations. In contrast, the port layer is located in FreeRTOS/Source/portable//, where each subdirectory tailors the RTOS to a specific combination of compiler (e.g., GCC, IAR Embedded Workbench) and processor family. This structure supports integration with various integrated development environments (IDEs) and build tools, including Eclipse-based systems, by providing demo applications that demonstrate configuration for each port. Additionally, FreeRTOS includes five heap management schemes in FreeRTOS/Source/portable/MemMang (e.g., heap_1.c to heap_5.c), allowing customization of dynamic memory allocation to suit different hardware constraints.
FreeRTOS officially supports over 40 processor architectures, spanning a wide range of embedded systems from 8-bit microcontrollers to 64-bit application processors, with compatibility for approximately 20 compilers. Official ports are maintained by Real Time Engineers Ltd. (the original developers, now under Amazon Web Services), ensuring reliability and ongoing updates, while contributed ports from third parties extend support further but may vary in maintenance. Key supported architecture families include ARM-based processors such as Cortex-M0/M0+/M3/M4/M7/M23/M33, Cortex-A5/A9/A53/R5, and legacy ARM7/ARM9; RISC-V implementations like SiFive RV32 and Microsemi Mi-V; 8/16/32-bit families from vendors including Microchip (PIC24/dsPIC, PIC32), NXP (LPC series), Renesas (RX, RL78, SuperH), STMicroelectronics (STM32), Texas Instruments (MSP430, MSP432, Stellaris), and Infineon (XMC, AURIX); as well as others like Altera Nios II, Cadence Xtensa, CEVA DSP cores, Intel x86 (including Win32 simulation), and Xilinx MicroBlaze/Zynq. These ports are adaptable to specific microcontroller variants within each family, with demo projects provided to facilitate initial setup and testing.
This extensive architectural coverage, combined with the layered portability model, enables FreeRTOS to run on diverse embedded platforms, from low-power IoT devices to high-performance automotive and industrial systems, while maintaining a minimal footprinttypically under 10 KB for the kernel. Porting to unsupported architectures follows a documented guide, focusing on implementing interrupt-safe critical sections, timer setup, and stack alignment, often achievable in a few weeks for experienced developers.

Integrated Libraries and Tools

FreeRTOS extends its core kernel through a collection of integrated libraries and tools, designed to facilitate the development of embedded applications with features like networking, security, data processing, and debugging. These components are MIT-licensed, portable across supported architectures, and optimized for low-resource microcontrollers, enabling seamless integration into IoT and real-time systems. The libraries are divided into categories such as Core Libraries for standards-based functionality, FreeRTOS+ for kernel-specific extensions, and experimental Labs projects, while tools focus on configuration, tracing, and utilities.

Core Libraries

The Core Libraries provide foundational implementations of open standards for connectivity, security, and data handling, suitable for microcontroller-based devices interfacing with cloud services like AWS IoT. They emphasize modularity, with no dependencies on specific hardware or the FreeRTOS kernel beyond basic abstractions, allowing reuse in other environments. Key examples include:

coreMQTT: A lightweight MQTT 3.1.1 client library that supports publish-subscribe messaging over TCP, optimized for constrained devices with features like session persistence and quality-of-service levels. It enables efficient communication in IoT scenarios without requiring a full TCP/IP stack.

coreHTTP: An HTTP/1.1 client library compliant with RFC 7230-7235 standards, supporting request-response patterns for secure web interactions, including HTTPS via integration with transport layers. It handles parsing and serialization for headers, bodies, and chunked transfers.

corePKCS11: Implements the PKCS #11 v2.40 cryptographic token interface standard, providing hardware abstraction for keys, certificates, and operations like signing and encryption, often integrated with hardware security modules (HSMs).

coreJSON: A minimal JSON parser and generator adhering to RFC 8259, capable of validating, searching, and appending to JSON documents in memory-constrained settings without dynamic allocation.

coreSNTP: A simple network time protocol client for synchronizing device clocks with NTP servers, essential for time-sensitive IoT operations.

AWS IoT Libraries (e.g., OTA, Device Shadow, Jobs, Device Defender): Specialized libraries for AWS integration, such as the Over-the-Air (OTA) library for secure firmware updates via MQTT, Device Shadow for state synchronization, Jobs for remote management, and Device Defender for anomaly detection and security alerts, all built on core libraries for authentication and messaging.

These libraries are part of the Long Term Support (LTS) releases, ensuring stability and security updates for at least two years.

FreeRTOS+ Libraries

FreeRTOS+ libraries offer enhanced functionality tightly coupled to the FreeRTOS kernel, providing practical tools for common embedded needs like networking and file management. They depend on the kernel for threading and synchronization but remain lightweight and configurable.
LibraryDescription
FreeRTOS-Plus-TCPA thread-safe, dual IPv4/IPv6 TCP/IP stack with BSD sockets API, supporting protocols like DHCP, DNS, and ICMP; designed for real-time applications with low latency and small footprint.
FreeRTOS-Plus-CLIA command-line interface parser that processes user input via UART or TCP, allowing runtime configuration and debugging through simple text commands.
FreeRTOS-Plus-FATA FAT12/16/32 file system implementation with read/write support, including long file names and partitioning, suitable for SD cards and USB storage in embedded systems.
FreeRTOS-Plus-TraceA tracing facility using macros to record kernel events (e.g., task switches, interrupts) into a circular buffer, exportable for analysis; integrates with tools like Percepio Tracealyzer for visualization.
These libraries are included in LTS packages and have been battle-tested in commercial deployments, with options for IPv6 extensions in Labs variants.

Tools and Utilities

FreeRTOS integrates utilities within the kernel and libraries for development and runtime support, focusing on ease of use without external dependencies. Kernel-level task utilities include functions like vTaskList() for runtime task status reporting and uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark() (requiring INCLUDE_uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark to be set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h for inclusion) for monitoring stack usage, aiding in debugging and optimization.
Configuration tools, such as the FreeRTOS Config Wizard (part of download packages), generate portable FreeRTOSConfig.h files tailored to hardware and requirements. For advanced analysis, the built-in tracing macros support integration with third-party tools, but core utilities like the heap monitoring APIs (e.g., xPortGetFreeHeapSize()) provide essential runtime insights directly. AWS-specific tools, like the FreeRTOS console for qualified device management, further streamline integration testing and certification.
Labs projects, such as FreeRTOS-Plus-POSIX for Unix-like portability and MCUBoot for secure bootloading, represent experimental tools evolving toward core integration, offering previews of future capabilities like over-the-air updates via Delta mechanisms.

Derivatives

Amazon FreeRTOS

Amazon FreeRTOS is a real-time operating system for microcontrollers, developed by Amazon Web Services (AWS) as an extension of the original FreeRTOS kernel to facilitate secure connectivity and management of Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Announced on November 29, 2017, at the AWS re:Invent conference, it builds on the open-source FreeRTOS foundation created by Richard Barry in 2003, with Barry joining AWS to lead its enhancement.
The system integrates the core FreeRTOS kerneldistributed under the MIT open-source licensewith AWS-specific libraries for connectivity, security, and over-the-air (OTA) updates, enabling low-power edge devices to connect easily to the AWS cloud. Key additions include pre-built libraries for protocols like MQTT and secure sockets, support for TLS encryption, and integration with AWS IoT Core for device provisioning, data ingestion, and remote management.
Unlike the standard FreeRTOS, which focuses primarily on kernel-level real-time operations, Amazon FreeRTOS emphasizes IoT scalability by qualifying hardware from partners such as Texas Instruments, Microchip, NXP Semiconductors, and STMicroelectronics, and providing demo applications for rapid prototyping. It also introduces FreeRTOS Long-Term Support (LTS) for stable releases and an Extended Maintenance Plan (EMP) for extended security patching, addressing the needs of billions of connected devices.
In 2020, Amazon FreeRTOS was rebranded simply as FreeRTOS to reflect its broader adoption beyond AWS-specific IoT use cases, while maintaining the same kernel and libraries; the project remains hosted on GitHub under AWS stewardship, with contributions from the community. This evolution has made it a market-leading RTOS, downloaded approximately every 170 seconds as of recent documentation.

SAFERTOS

SAFERTOS is a pre-certified real-time operating system (RTOS) designed for safety-critical embedded applications, developed by WITTENSTEIN high integrity systems under license from Real Time Engineers Ltd., the creators of FreeRTOS. It adopts the functional model of the FreeRTOS kernel, including its API structure for tasks, queues, semaphores, and mutexes, but features a complete redesign of the underlying implementation to meet stringent safety requirements without altering the user-facing interface. This allows developers familiar with FreeRTOS to migrate applications with minimal code changes while gaining safety certifications.
SAFERTOS has undergone independent certification by TV SD to IEC 61508 SIL 3, confirming its development processes and design rigor for safety integrity level 3 applications in industrial and process control systems. It is also pre-certified to ISO 26262 ASIL D for automotive applications, supports DO-178C for avionics, IEC 62304 for medical devices, and FDA 510(k) compliance, making it suitable for high-risk environments where failure could lead to loss of life, injury, or significant environmental damage. These certifications reduce the certification burden for end-product developers by providing verifiable safety evidence, including safety manuals and analysis reports.
Key features of SAFERTOS emphasize determinism, robustness, and resource efficiency for safety-critical use. It employs a preemptive priority-based scheduler that ensures predictable task execution times, with no dynamic memory allocation to prevent fragmentation and runtime errors common in safety contexts. Task stacks are statically allocated and protected with spatial separation via memory protection units (MPUs) on supported hardware, isolating faults to individual tasks without system-wide crashes. Additional safeguards include runtime stack overflow detection, assertion checking, and support for ultra-low power modes, enabling applications in battery-powered devices. SAFERTOS supports multicore processors, typically running safety-critical tasks on a dedicated core while isolating faults, but does not provide symmetric multiprocessing (SMP). These elements contribute to its small footprinttypically under 10 KB of ROM and minimal RAMwhile delivering high performance for complex embedded systems. As of November 2025, SAFERTOS aligns with FreeRTOS kernel updates up to version 10.x, with adaptations for safety certification.

OPENRTOS

OPENRTOS is a commercially licensed variant of the FreeRTOS kernel, developed and distributed by WITTENSTEIN high integrity systems to provide embedded developers with a real-time operating system (RTOS) free from open-source licensing constraints. It maintains functional equivalence to the core FreeRTOS scheduler and API while offering enhanced commercial terms, including indemnification against intellectual property claims and exclusion of open-source code obligations. This makes OPENRTOS suitable for applications requiring proprietary development without the modified GPL references present in earlier FreeRTOS versions.
The OPENRTOS kernel is updated in parallel with Amazon FreeRTOS, ensuring compatibility with the latest FreeRTOS enhancements under the MIT license. It supports the same preemptive priority-based scheduling, task management, and synchronization primitives as FreeRTOS, with a compact footprint optimized for resource-constrained microcontrollers. Typical ROM usage ranges from 4 to 9 kB, RAM from 250 bytes, and per-task stack from 400 bytes, allowing deployment on devices with limited memory. Middleware components, such as TCP/IP stacks and file systems, are available under the same commercial umbrella if needed.
Licensing for OPENRTOS is perpetual and royalty-free, supplied as full source code with no runtime fees. Standard options include production licenses starting at basic kernel access, scaling to comprehensive packages with middleware and custom porting services. Unlike the open-source FreeRTOS, OPENRTOS includes a 12-month warranty covering updates, maintenance, and technical support, extendable through subscription. Professional services encompass board support packages, processor porting, and integration assistance, targeting industries like automotive and industrial automation. While not safety-certified itselfunlike the related SAFERTOS variantOPENRTOS provides a foundation for custom certification efforts in safety-critical environments. As of November 2025, OPENRTOS aligns with FreeRTOS kernel updates up to version 10.x for commercial stability.

References

FreeRTOS - FreeRTOS

The FreeRTOS Kernel

FreeRTOS Kernel Developer Docs - FreeRTOS

Creator of FreeRTOS talks to Electronics Weekly

Amazon FreeRTOS - Silicon Labs

FreeRTOS Core Libraries

Security overview - FreeRTOS

https://www.freertos.org/Documentation/03-Libraries/01-Library-overview/03-LTS-libraries/01-LTS-libraries

RTOS Fundamentals - FreeRTOS

https://www.freertos.org/Documentation/02-Kernel/01-About-the-FreeRTOS-kernel/04-Licensing

FreeRTOS FAQ - Licensing

https://www.freertos.org/Documentation/02-Kernel/01-About-the-FreeRTOS-kernel/04-Licensing#optional-freertos-commercial-licensing

The Architecture of Open Source Applications (Volume 2)FreeRTOS

Announcing Amazon FreeRTOS Enabling Billions of Devices to ...

Real-Time Operating System - FreeRTOS - AWS

https://aws.amazon.com/freertos/features/

https://www.freertos.org/Documentation/04-Roadmap-and-release-note/02-Release-notes/00-Release-history

https://www.freertos.org/lts-libraries.html

Security Vulnerabilities - FreeRTOS

Smarter Devices at the Edge: A Conversation with FreeRTOS ...

FreeRTOS kernel fundamentals - AWS Documentation

Creating a New FreeRTOS Port

Source Organization - FreeRTOS

Customization - FreeRTOS

Tasks and Co-routines - FreeRTOS

https://www.freertos.org/RTOS-task-states.html

xTaskCreate - FreeRTOS

Task states - FreeRTOS

Tasks - FreeRTOS

vTaskDelay() - FreeRTOS

vTaskSuspend() - FreeRTOS

https://www.freertos.org/a00131.html

vTaskDelete - FreeRTOS

FreeRTOS scheduling (single-core, AMP and SMP)

FreeRTOS binary semaphores

FreeRTOS counting semaphores - FreeRTOS

FreeRTOS mutexes

FreeRTOS event groups - FreeRTOS

3 Heap Memory Management | Mastering the FreeRTOS Real ...

Manage application memory - FreeRTOS - AWS Documentation

FreeRTOS heap memory management

 The FreeRTOS Reference Manual

 Mastering the FreeRTOS Real Time Kernel

Supported Devices - FreeRTOS

'Officially Supported' and 'Contributed' FreeRTOS Code

Supported Demos - FreeRTOS

FreeRTOS Library Categories

coreHTTP library - FreeRTOS - AWS Documentation

FreeRTOS versions - AWS Documentation

FreeRTOS LTS Libraries

Task Utilities - FreeRTOS

FreeRTOS Lab Libraries

FreeRTOS Services | Commercial Licencing, Porting and Upgrades

What is FreeRTOS? - AWS Documentation

Document history - FreeRTOS

SAFERTOS and OPENRTOS - FreeRTOS

FreeRTOS and SAFERTOS Comparison

Functional Safety Standards of our Safety Critical RTOS, SAFERTOS

SafeRTOS certified to IEC61508 SIL3 by TUV SUD - FreeRTOS

WITTENSTEIN SAFERTOS - STMicroelectronics

SafeRTOS Features often used with popular ARM Cortex M3, M4 ...

SAFERTOS | Pre-Certified Safety RTOS - Hitex GmbH

SAFERTOS Supported Devices

SAFERTOS now supports the TI Jacinto and Sitara platforms

OPENRTOS, part of embedded FreeRTOS

OPENRTOS Features - Functional Overview

Licensing for our RTOS & Middleware

uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark

uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark - FreeRTOS
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion