Game tree Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Game tree
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A game tree, also known as an extensive-form game representation, is a directed acyclic graph that models the sequential decision-making process in a game by depicting all possible moves, choices, and outcomes as nodes and branches, with terminal nodes assigning payoffs to players based on their preferences.
Originating in the foundational work of John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern in their 1944 book Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, game trees formalized the extensive form of games to analyze strategic interactions where players make decisions over time, often under uncertainty introduced by chance moves. The structure was further refined by Harold W. Kuhn in 1953, who introduced key concepts like information setsgroupings of nodes where a player lacks full knowledge of the game's historyand the distinction between perfect recall (where players remember all prior actions) and imperfect recall.
Central components of a game tree include a root node representing the initial decision point, internal nodes partitioned among players or a chance node (modeling probabilistic events), directed edges signifying available actions, and leaf nodes with payoff vectors that quantify outcomes for each participant. These elements enable the application of solution concepts such as backward induction for perfect-information games, where optimal strategies are determined by working from terminal payoffs upward, and subgame perfection to refine equilibria in more complex scenarios with imperfect information.
Game trees are pivotal in noncooperative game theory for studying zero-sum games like chess or poker, as well as broader applications in economics, artificial intelligence, and decision analysis, where they facilitate the evaluation of strategic foresight and commitment devices. Despite their utility, limitations arise in handling infinite or highly branching structures, prompting computational techniques like alpha-beta pruning in AI implementations.

Definition and Fundamentals

Formal Definition

A game tree is a directed tree structure in which the nodes represent distinct game positions or states, and the directed edges represent legal moves transitioning from one position to another. The leaves of the tree are terminal nodes corresponding to final game outcomes, such as a win, loss, or draw for the involved players. Formally, a game tree GGG can be denoted as G=(N,E)G = (N, E)G=(N,E), where NNN is the finite set of nodes representing all possible positions, and ENNE \subseteq N \times NENN is the set of directed edges indicating valid moves.
The root node of the game tree denotes the initial game state from which play begins, and paths from the root to any leaf represent possible sequences of moves. Along these paths, players alternate turns, with each edge corresponding to a move by the current player. Terminal nodes are associated with payoff functions that assign values to the outcomes; in two-player zero-sum games, these are commonly defined as +1+1+1 for a win by the maximizing player, 1-11 for a loss (win by the minimizing player), and 000 for a draw.
Game trees are primarily defined for games of perfect information, where the entire tree is fully visible to all players at every decision point, enabling complete knowledge of the current position and all prior moves. In contrast, imperfect information games involve partial observability, represented in game trees using information sets that group indistinguishable decision nodes, though the focus here remains on perfect information settings. This concept draws from basic directed tree structures in graph theory but is specialized for sequential decision-making in adversarial environments.
The application of game trees to computer chess programs was outlined by Claude Shannon in his 1950 paper on programming a computer for playing chess, where he discussed their use for evaluating move sequences in complex board games.

Key Components

A game tree consists of nodes that represent distinct game states or positions. Internal nodes correspond to non-terminal positions where at least one legal move is available, allowing the current player to branch to subsequent states, while terminal nodes depict end states with no further moves possible, such as checkmate, stalemate, or draw in chess, each assigned a fixed outcome value like win, loss, or tie. In two-player zero-sum games, nodes are further labeled as maximizer nodes for the player seeking to maximize their score or minimizer nodes for the opponent aiming to minimize it, alternating levels to reflect turns.
Edges in a game tree connect parent nodes to child nodes, explicitly labeled with the moves or actions that transition between states, such as pawn advances or captures in chess. The branching factor quantifies the average number of child nodes per internal node, often around 30-35 for chess positions based on analyses of master games, indicating the tree's expansiveness at each level.
The depth of a game tree refers to the longest path length from the root node (initial position) to a terminal leaf, measured in plies or half-moves, which can exceed 100 in complex games like chess due to rules limiting repetitions. Breadth describes the width of the tree, or the number of nodes at a specific level, growing exponentially with the branching factor and influencing computational demands.
In the and-or tree variant, commonly used for two-player zero-sum games, nodes are distinguished as OR nodes for the current player's turnwhere success requires at least one favorable child outcome (disjunction)and AND nodes for the opponent's turnwhere the player must account for all possible responses (conjunction) to evaluate robustness. This structure facilitates minimax evaluation by propagating values upward: OR nodes take the maximum child value, while AND nodes take the minimum.
An evaluation function provides a static numerical assessment of non-terminal nodes when full expansion to terminals is infeasible, estimating desirability based on features like material balance (e.g., assigning +1 for each pawn advantage and +9 for a queen in chess heuristics). These functions are designed to correlate with true game-theoretic values, prioritizing positions closer to victory for the maximizer.

Examples and Illustrations

Simple Board Games

Simple board games provide accessible illustrations of game trees, where the structure captures all possible sequences of moves in perfect information, two-player zero-sum scenarios. These examples highlight how the tree's root represents the initial position, branches denote legal moves alternating between players, and leaves indicate terminal states such as wins, losses, or draws. By examining small-scale games, one can see the exhaustive nature of enumeration feasible only for limited state spaces.
In tic-tac-toe, played on a 3x3 grid where players alternate placing marks to achieve three in a row, the full game tree originates from an empty board root with nine initial branches corresponding to possible first moves. Subsequent levels narrow as the board fills, culminating in 255,168 leaf nodes that represent all possible terminal positions, including wins for the first player (X), second player (O), or draws. Due to the game's symmetriesrotations by 90, 180, or 270 degrees and reflections over horizontals, verticals, or diagonals, forming the dihedral group D4 with eight elementsthe effective tree size reduces dramatically; equivalent positions are grouped, yielding approximately 26,830 unique nodes for analysis while preserving strategic equivalence. This symmetry reduction technique, applied during tree construction, eliminates redundant exploration of isomorphic subtrees, making exhaustive solving practical by hand or computation; for instance, the root branches collapse to three distinct cases: center, corner, or edge placement. Terminal nodes in this tree are evaluated as +1 for X win, -1 for O win, or 0 for draw, with 91 distinct X wins, 44 O wins, and 3 draws under symmetry.
The single-heap variant of Nim, a subtraction game where players alternate removing 1 to 3 objects from a pile (with the last move winning), exemplifies a linear yet branching game tree revealing winning and losing positions. From a root node with heap size n, branches extend to heaps of size n-1, n-2, or n-3, alternating player turns until reaching the terminal leaf at size 0 (a loss for the player to move). Positions where n modulo 4 equals 0 are losing for the current player under optimal play, as any move leaves a winning position for the opponent; for example, starting from 5 objects, the tree branches to 4, 3, or 2, where 4 and 0 mod 4 lead to forced wins via responses mirroring to maintain the modulo advantage. This structure demonstrates backward induction: labeling leaves as losses propagates upward, identifying safe moves that force opponents into losing nodes.
A simplified checkers endgame on a 3x3 board, with pieces able to move or capture diagonally toward the promotion row, illustrates moderate branching and depth in a constrained space. The game tree root might represent an initial configuration with two opposing kings or men, branching to 2-4 moves per turn depending on captures and positions, with depth limited to 4-6 plies before terminals due to the small board. For instance, a position with one red king in the center and a black man in a corner yields branches for advances or jumps, narrowing as pieces are captured or kings promote, emphasizing how captures increase branching factors temporarily while reducing overall depth compared to full 8x8 checkers. Exhaustive enumeration here remains viable, similar to tic-tac-toe, allowing full traversal to determine optimal paths to checkmate or stalemate terminals.

Tree Search in Puzzles

Tree search in puzzles applies game tree concepts to single-agent environments, where the objective is to find a path from an initial state to a goal state without an adversarial opponent, emphasizing the discovery of optimal or shortest paths through state expansions. Unlike adversarial games, puzzle-solving focuses on uninformed or informed search strategies to navigate the state space efficiently, treating legal moves as branches in the tree.
A classic example is the Tower of Hanoi puzzle, which involves moving a stack of n disks from one peg to another using a third auxiliary peg, adhering to rules that prevent larger disks from being placed on smaller ones. The states in this puzzle are represented by the configurations of disk positions on the three pegs, with legal moves corresponding to transferring the top disk from one peg to another. The recursive solution to the puzzle generates a tree structure where the number of nodes corresponds to the minimal sequence of moves required, totaling 2^n - 1 nodes for n disks.
The 8-puzzle, a sliding tile puzzle on a 3x3 grid with eight numbered tiles and one blank space, exemplifies goal-oriented tree search in a more complex state space. Each state is a permutation of the tiles, and moves involve sliding an adjacent tile into the blank space, forming branches in the search tree. The reachable state space consists of approximately 181,440 configurations, half of the total 9! permutations due to parity constraints, with search paths directed toward rearranging the tiles into a specific goal configuration.
In the Rubik's Cube, a simplified model highlights the rapid state explosion in puzzle tree search, where states represent the positions and orientations of the cube's cubies, and branches arise from legal 90-degree turns of the six faces. The initial branching factor can reach 18 possible moves from the starting position, quickly expanding the tree to encompass an enormous number of states and underscoring the challenges of exhaustive exploration in such puzzles.
The branching factor, or average number of legal moves per state, provides a measure of tree width in these puzzles, influencing the computational demands of search without involving opponent responses.

Construction and Analysis

Building Game Trees

The construction of a game tree begins with the root node, which represents the initial state of the game. From this root, the process recursively expands by enumerating all legal moves available to the current player, creating child nodes for each resulting successor state. This alternation between playerstypically maximizing and minimizing players in two-player zero-sum gamescontinues layer by layer until terminal nodes are reached, where no further legal moves exist or predefined end conditions such as checkmate, timeout, or victory are met.
To manage redundancy, symmetries and transpositions in the game tree are handled by detecting and merging identical or equivalent positions. Symmetries, such as board rotations or reflections, are identified through graph automorphisms on a representation of the game's rules, allowing equivalent branches to be pruned during expansion. Transpositionspositions reachable via different move sequencesare merged using hashing methods like Zobrist hashing, where each game feature (e.g., piece placements) is assigned a random 64-bit value, and the state key is computed via bitwise XOR; this key indexes a transposition table to store and retrieve evaluations, avoiding recomputation.
Game trees are commonly represented using adjacency lists, in which each node maintains a list of pointers or references to its child nodes, corresponding to the outgoing edges for legal moves. This structure efficiently captures the tree's branching without storing unnecessary connections. Trees may be constructed explicitly by pre-building the full structure in memory for small games, or implicitly by generating nodes on-the-fly during traversal, which conserves resources in larger state spaces.
In practice, recursive functions in programming languages facilitate the construction, systematically generating moves and building the tree depth-first. The following pseudocode illustrates a basic recursive approach for move generation and tree expansion:
function generate_tree(current_state, player):
 if is_terminal(current_state):
 return create_terminal_node(current_state, evaluate_utility(current_state))
 
 tree_node = create_node(current_state, player)
 legal_moves = get_legal_moves(current_state, player)
 
 for move in legal_moves:
 next_state = apply_move(current_state, move)
 child_tree = generate_tree(next_state, opponent(player))
 add_child(tree_node, child_tree)
 
 return tree_node
This recursion starts at the root and terminates at leaves, with move generation depending on the game's rules.
A key challenge arises in games prone to cycles, such as potential loops in Go where repeated board positions could lead to infinite branches without preventive rules like superko. Cycle detection is addressed via transposition tables, which use hashing to identify and avoid revisiting repeated states, preventing infinite recursion and ensuring finite tree exploration.

Complexity and Size Considerations

The size of a game tree grows exponentially with its depth, primarily determined by the branching factor bbb, which represents the average number of legal moves available at each position, and the depth ddd, corresponding to the typical length of a game in plies (half-moves). The total number of nodes in the tree is approximately bdb^dbd, reflecting the combinatorial explosion inherent in sequential decision-making under perfect information.
In chess, for instance, the average branching factor is estimated at about 35, while a typical game extends to roughly 80 plies, resulting in an astronomically large tree that underscores the computational infeasibility of exhaustive exploration. Game tree complexity is formally defined as the number of leaf nodes in the full game tree from the initial position, equivalent to the total number of possible distinct game sequences leading to terminal states. For chess, this is quantified by the Shannon number, a conservative lower bound of 1012010^{120}10120 possible games, highlighting the scale far beyond practical computation even in the mid-20th century.
This complexity contrasts sharply with state-space complexity, which measures the number of distinct reachable positions rather than paths through the tree; in chess, the state-space size is approximately 104310^{43}1043 to 104610^{46}1046, orders of magnitude smaller than the game-tree complexity due to the multiplicity of sequences converging on similar positions via different move orders. Factors such as variable branching factorshigher in midgame positions with more tactical optionsand stochastic elements further inflate tree size; in backgammon, dice rolls introduce chance nodes with 36 possible outcomes per turn, yielding an effective branching factor of around 400 and complicating deterministic analysis.
Ernst Zermelo's 1913 theorem established that every finite, two-player, zero-sum game of perfect information possesses a determined solutioneither a win for the first player, a win for the second, or a drawprovable via backward induction on the game tree. However, for games with large trees like chess, this theoretical resolvability remains impractical, as the exponential growth precludes complete enumeration on any foreseeable computing resources.

Algorithms for Solving

Deterministic Methods

Deterministic methods for solving game trees employ exact algorithms that fully explore the decision tree in perfect-information, two-player zero-sum games to compute optimal strategies. These approaches assume no hidden information or chance elements, relying on backward induction to propagate values from terminal positions to the root.
The minimax algorithm forms the core of these methods, recursively evaluating positions by alternating between maximization and minimization layers. Introduced in the context of game theory, it assumes the maximizing player (e.g., white) selects the move leading to the highest guaranteed score, while the minimizing player (e.g., black) chooses the move yielding the lowest score for the opponent. The algorithm begins at leaf nodes, assigning their utility values (e.g., +1 for a win, -1 for a loss, 0 for a draw), and propagates these upward: for a maximizing node, the value is the maximum over its children's values; for a minimizing node, it is the minimum.
Formally, the value $ v(n) $ of a node $ n $ is defined as:
v(n)={maxcchildren(n)v(c)ifnismaximizingmincchildren(n)v(c)ifnisminimizingu(n)ifnisterminal
v(n) = 
\begin{cases} 
\max_{c \in \text{children}(n)} v(c) & \text{if } n \text{ is maximizing} \\
\min_{c \in \text{children}(n)} v(c) & \text{if } n \text{ is minimizing} \\
u(n) & \text{if } n \text{ is terminal}
\end{cases}
v(n)=maxcchildren(n)v(c)mincchildren(n)v(c)u(n)ifnismaximizingifnisminimizingifnisterminal
where $ u(n) $ is the utility of terminal node $ n $. This recursive propagation ensures the root value represents the best achievable outcome assuming optimal play by both sides.
To address the exponential growth of game trees, alpha-beta pruning optimizes minimax by eliminating branches that cannot affect the final decision. It maintains two parameters, alpha (the best already explored option for the maximizer) and beta (the best for the minimizer), pruning subtrees when the current best exceeds the opponent's threshold (i.e., alpha beta). The algorithm proceeds depth-first, updating bounds after each evaluation.
Pseudocode for alpha-beta pruning:
function alphabeta(node, depth, , , maximizingPlayer):
 if depth == 0 or is_terminal(node):
 return evaluate(node)
 if maximizingPlayer:
 maxEval = -
 for (/page/Child) in children(node):
 eval = alphabeta((/page/Child), depth - 1, , , false)
 maxEval = max(maxEval, eval)
 = max(, maxEval)
 if :
 break // beta cutoff
 return maxEval
 else:
 minEval = +
 for (/page/Child) in children(node):
 eval = alphabeta((/page/Child), depth - 1, , , true)
 minEval = min(minEval, eval)
 = min(, minEval)
 if :
 break // alpha cutoff
 return minEval
This maintains the same optimality as minimax while reducing the effective branching factor.
Retrograde analysis extends these techniques for endgame solving by starting from all terminal positions and iteratively computing values backward through the tree until reaching positions of interest. It is particularly effective for subsets of the game with few pieces, building exhaustive databases that store the outcome for every configuration. For instance, in checkers, retrograde analysis was used to construct endgame databases covering up to 10 pieces, enabling the complete solution of the game as a draw with perfect play, announced in 2007.
These deterministic methods guarantee optimal play in finite, loop-free games, as the game tree's structure ensures every position has a determined value via backward induction. The time complexity of minimax (and alpha-beta in the worst case) is $ O(b^d) $, where $ b $ is the average branching factor and $ d $ is the depth, reflecting the total nodes explored.
A classic application is solving tic-tac-toe, where minimax fully enumerates the 9-ply tree (about 255,168 leaf positions after symmetries), confirming it as a draw under perfect play from the starting position.

Randomized and Heuristic Approaches

Randomized and heuristic approaches address the limitations of exhaustive deterministic methods in large game trees by introducing approximations that prioritize computational efficiency over perfect optimality. These techniques are essential for handling the exponential growth in tree size, enabling practical decision-making in complex environments like board games. Heuristics provide quick estimates of position values, while randomized methods leverage sampling to explore promising paths, often balancing exploration and exploitation through probabilistic mechanisms.
Heuristic methods rely on evaluation functions to approximate the desirability of leaf nodes without full expansion. In chess, a typical evaluation function computes a score based on factors such as material advantageassigning values like 1 for a pawn and 9 for a queenand positional elements like king safety or pawn structure, allowing the search to cutoff at a moderate depth. To mitigate the horizon effect, where dangerous tactics are overlooked near the search boundary, quiescence search extends evaluation along volatile lines, such as captures or promotions, until the position stabilizes, ensuring more reliable assessments of tactical positions.
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) represents a prominent randomized approach, iteratively building an asymmetric search tree through repeated simulations of gameplay. The algorithm proceeds in four phases: selection traverses the existing tree using a bandit-based policy to balance known rewards and uncertainty; expansion adds a new child node to the tree; simulation performs a random rollout from the new node to a terminal state; and backpropagation updates statistics along the path with the simulation outcome. The selection phase employs the Upper Confidence bound applied to Trees (UCT) formula to select actions:
a=argmaxa(Q(s,a)N(s,a)+clnN(s)N(s,a))
a = \arg\max_a \left( \frac{Q(s,a)}{N(s,a)} + c \sqrt{\frac{\ln N(s)}{N(s,a)}} \right)
a=argamax(N(s,a)Q(s,a)+cN(s,a)lnN(s))
where $ Q(s,a) $ is the average reward for action $ a $ in state $ s $, $ N(s,a) $ is the visit count for that action, $ N(s) $ is the total visits to $ s $, and $ c $ is an exploration parameter. This formula, derived from multi-armed bandit theory, favors high-reward actions while encouraging exploration of under-visited ones. MCTS gained prominence in 2006 through applications in computer Go, where it enabled strong play on large boards by focusing simulations on relevant subtrees, laying groundwork for later systems like AlphaGo.
For games with stochastic elements, such as dice rolls or card draws, the expectiminimax algorithm adapts tree search by incorporating chance nodes that average outcomes weighted by their probabilities, rather than minimizing or maximizing. At max nodes, it selects the action maximizing expected value; at min nodes, the opponent minimizes it; and at chance nodes, it computes the expectation over possible transitions. This extension handles uncertainty by propagating probabilistic values upward, though it increases computational demands due to branching at chance points.
These approaches offer significant speedups over exact methods but introduce suboptimality, as heuristics may misestimate values and random sampling can miss critical paths. Variance in MCTS outcomes is mitigated through multiple playouts per iteration, improving estimate reliability at the cost of additional computation, making them suitable for real-time decisions in high-branching-factor domains.

Applications and Extensions

In Artificial Intelligence

Game trees form the foundation of decision-making in artificial intelligence systems designed for two-player zero-sum games, where AI agents evaluate possible move sequences to select optimal actions. A seminal example is IBM's Deep Blue, which in 1997 defeated world chess champion Garry Kasparov by employing the minimax algorithm augmented with alpha-beta pruning to traverse and prune the vast chess game tree efficiently. This approach allowed Deep Blue to explore up to 200 million positions per second, focusing on deeper searches in critical lines while discarding suboptimal branches. More recently, DeepMind's AlphaZero, introduced in 2017, revolutionized game-playing AI by integrating Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with deep neural networks to guide the expansion of game trees in chess, shogi, and Go, achieving superhuman performance through self-play reinforcement learning without domain-specific knowledge. A further advancement, DeepMind's MuZero (2019), builds on this by learning a model of the game's dynamics implicitly during self-play, enabling superhuman performance across board games and Atari without rules provided.
To mitigate the computational demands of exhaustive game tree searches, AI systems incorporate enhancements like transposition tables and iterative deepening. Transposition tables store evaluations of previously visited positions, avoiding redundant computations by detecting when different move sequences lead to the same board state, a technique that significantly reduces search time in games with reversible moves like chess. Iterative deepening, proposed by Korf in 1985, performs successive depth-limited searches, increasing the depth incrementally to allocate time optimally and provide anytime results suitable for time-constrained environments. These methods, often combined with alpha-beta pruning, enable practical exploration of game trees that would otherwise be infeasible due to exponential growth.
Beyond perfect-information games, game tree principles extend to AI applications in robotics and planning under uncertainty. In robotics, the A* algorithm adapts heuristic tree search for pathfinding, using admissible heuristics to guarantee optimal paths in state spaces modeled as trees or graphs, as demonstrated in early work on minimum-cost path determination. For planning in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), game trees represent action sequences and state transitions, allowing AI agents to compute value functions or policies via methods like value iteration, which unrolls the decision tree to evaluate long-term rewards in stochastic environments.
The impact of game tree-based AI is evident in solving complex games, such as checkers, which Chinook fully solved in 2007 as a draw with perfect play after exhaustive retrograde analysis of its 5 10^20 positions, marking a milestone in deterministic game solving. Ongoing advancements, like MCTS in AlphaZero, have pushed boundaries in Go, where traditional minimax fails due to immense branching factors, enabling AI mastery in previously intractable domains. However, limitations persist, particularly the curse of dimensionality, where high branching factors and state spaces explode exponentially, rendering full tree searches impractical for real-time applications like video games or autonomous driving without aggressive pruning or approximations.

Variants in Modern Game Theory

In modern game theory, game trees serve as the foundational representation for extensive-form games, where the structure explicitly models the sequence of moves, information availability, and payoffs. Introduced by John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern in their seminal 1944 work, this representation captures the dynamic evolution of strategic interactions through a tree of decision nodes, chance events, and terminal payoffs, enabling the analysis of strategies as behavioral choices at each information point. Extensive-form games generalize beyond simple perfect-information scenarios, accommodating complex timing and dependencies that normal-form representations obscure.
For games with imperfect information, where players cannot observe certain aspects of the game statesuch as opponents' actions or hidden attributesstandard game trees are augmented with information sets, grouping indistinguishable nodes into equivalence classes to reflect the player's limited knowledge. This adaptation is crucial in domains like poker, where a player's hand remains private, leading to multiple possible histories that appear identical to the decision-maker. Belief trees further extend this framework by representing nodes as probability distributions over possible states (belief states), akin to the state-space in partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs), which model single-agent decision-making under uncertainty but inform multi-agent imperfect-information settings by quantifying epistemic uncertainty. In partially observable stochastic games (POSGs), a multi-agent generalization of POMDPs, the tree incorporates these beliefs to evaluate policies across shared hidden states.
Extensions to multi-player settings transform the binary two-player tree into an n-player structure, where branches account for sequential or simultaneous moves among more than two agents, often introducing coalitionssubsets of players who can form binding agreements to coordinate strategies. Unlike zero-sum two-player games, these n-player trees typically feature non-zero-sum payoffs, allowing for outcomes where total rewards exceed or fall short of zero, and equilibria may involve mixed coalitions rather than strict opposition. Coalitional analysis in such trees focuses on the value of subsets (e.g., via the characteristic function), assessing stable allocations that prevent deviations by any group, as explored in cooperative game theory frameworks that build on extensive forms.
Stochastic elements are incorporated through chance nodes in the game tree, which introduce probabilistic transitions to model uncertainty from random events, such as dice rolls or environmental noise, transforming the structure into a stochastic game or Markov game. These nodes branch according to probability distributions, with expected payoffs computed via backward induction or value iteration over the tree. For infinite-horizon variants, where the game continues indefinitely without a fixed endpoint, discounting is applied to future payoffs using a factor (0 < < 1) to ensure convergence, weighting immediate rewards more heavily and enabling the definition of stationary policies in discounted stochastic games, a concept central to reinforcement learning applications in game-theoretic contexts.
A key recent advance in handling large-scale imperfect-information trees is counterfactual regret minimization (CFR), an iterative algorithm that approximates Nash equilibria by minimizing "counterfactual" regretshypothetical losses from not choosing an action at an information set, weighted by the probability of reaching that set under optimal play. Introduced in 2007, CFR converges to an equilibrium in self-play iterations for extensive-form games, proving particularly effective for computationally intensive domains like poker by avoiding full tree traversal through regret matching updates. Subsequent variants, such as Monte Carlo CFR, sample paths to scale to massive trees with millions of information sets. Recent extensions, such as Preference-CFR introduced in 2024, refine the approach by integrating player preferences to compute strategies superior to Nash equilibria in certain settings.

References

Game Theory - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

 Game Theory

 Game Theory: A Language of Interaction - Adam Brandenburger

None

XXII. Programming a computer for playing chess

Programming a Computer for Playing Chess

3.2 Minimax | Introduction to Artificial Intelligence

 Artificial Intelligence for Games - Lamsade

Canonical and Reduced Game Trees for Tic-Tac-Toe - Justin Skycak

How to find the complexity of decision trees in Tic Tac Toe by hand?

 Chapter 5 - UMBC

Restricted Nim with one pile - game theory - Math Stack Exchange

MINIMAX Checkers - Google Sites

 5 ADVERSARIAL SEARCH - Gettysburg Computer Science

 Computer Science - Kent State University

Comparative analysis of AI-based search algorithms in solving 8 ...

 Algorithms for solving the Rubik's cube - DiVA portal

 Uninformed Search - CMU School of Computer Science

 Game Tree Search - University of Toronto

 Symmetry Detection in General Game Playing

http://www.cs.wisc.edu/techreports/1970/TR88.pdf

 Solving games - CMU School of Computer Science

 6 ADVERSARIAL SEARCH - Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach

 XXII. Programming a Computer for Playing Chess1

11.1 TD-Gammon

 ber eine anwendung der mengenlehre auf

Minimax - Chessprogramming wiki

 Zermelo and the Early History of Game Theory

John von Neumann's Minimax Theorem (1928) - Privatdozent

 ON THE THEORY OF GAMES OF STRATEGY - John von Neumann

An analysis of alpha-beta pruning - ScienceDirect.com

 Solving Checkers - Department of Computing Science

Depth-first iterative-deepening: An optimal admissible tree search

 Checkers is solved - Department of Computing Science

Curse of Dimensionality in Machine Learning - Analytics Vidhya

https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691130613/theory-of-games-and-economic-behavior

 Lecture 9 Foundations of extensive-form games - MIT

 Dynamic Programming for Partially Observable Stochastic Games

 Introduction to Game Theory: Cooperative Games - CUHK CSE

 Computing Optimal Strategies to Commit to in Stochastic Games

 A Course in Stochastic Game Theory

 Regret Minimization in Games with Incomplete Information

 Monte Carlo Sampling for Regret Minimization in Extensive Games
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion