Graph traversal Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Graph traversal
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Graph traversal is the process of systematically visiting each vertex in a graph data structure in a specific order, based on the graph's topology and connectivity, to explore its structure without revisiting nodes unnecessarily. This fundamental technique in computer science underpins many graph algorithms by ensuring all reachable vertices are processed exactly once, often starting from a designated source vertex and handling disconnected components through repeated traversals.
The two primary methods for graph traversal are breadth-first search (BFS) and depth-first search (DFS), both achieving a time complexity of O(V+E)O(V + E)O(V+E) where VVV is the number of vertices and EEE is the number of edges. BFS operates iteratively using a queue to explore vertices level by level, expanding from the source to all immediate neighbors before proceeding to the next layer, making it ideal for finding the shortest paths in unweighted graphs or determining the minimum distance to all other vertices. In contrast, DFS employs a recursive approach or a stack to delve as deeply as possible along each branch before backtracking, which is particularly useful for tasks like topological sorting in directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) or detecting cycles by monitoring revisits to marked vertices.
Graph traversal serves as a core primitive for numerous applications across computer science, including network analysis, artificial intelligence state-space searches, maze solving, and checking graph properties such as connectivity or bipartiteness. For instance, BFS enables efficient single-source shortest path computations in scenarios like social network recommendations or web crawling, while DFS facilitates ordering dependencies in scheduling problems or compiler optimizations. These algorithms are adaptable to both directed and undirected graphs, with implementations often incorporating visited flags to prevent infinite loops in the presence of cycles.

Fundamentals

Definition and Purpose

Graph traversal refers to a class of algorithms that systematically explore the vertices and edges of a graph to visit each vertex, typically exactly once or as required by the application, by following connections to neighboring vertices in a structured manner. Graphs are abstract mathematical structures consisting of a set of vertices, representing entities or nodes, and a set of edges, representing connections or relationships between them; these can be undirected, where edges have no direction, or directed, where edges indicate a specific orientation. Unlike linear data structures such as arrays or linked lists, which possess a natural sequential order, or trees, which have a hierarchical structure, graphs generally lack any inherent ordering, necessitating traversal methods to impose a systematic exploration of their topology.
The primary purpose of graph traversal is to address connectivity and exploration challenges inherent to graphs, such as identifying connected componentsmaximal subgraphs where every pair of vertices is reachable from each otherdetecting cycles, which are closed paths that revisit a vertex, and discovering paths between specified vertices. These capabilities enable solutions to a wide range of problems, including network analysis, route planning, and determining graph reachability, by revealing structural properties that would otherwise be obscured by the graph's unstructured nature.
The conceptual foundations of graph theory, including early notions of traversal related to path exploration, originated with Leonhard Euler's 1736 solution to the Seven Bridges of Knigsberg problem, which formalized graphs as entities amenable to systematic bridge-crossing analysis. Modern graph traversal algorithms, however, developed in the mid-20th century alongside the rise of computer science, with systematic approaches emerging in the 1950s and 1960s to leverage computational power for efficient exploration; seminal work in the 1970s further refined these methods for linear-time performance. Primary traversal strategies include depth-first search, which explores as far as possible along each branch before backtracking, and breadth-first search, which explores all neighbors at the current depth before proceeding deeper.

Graph Representations for Traversal

Graph traversal algorithms rely on efficient data structures to represent the underlying graph, enabling quick access to vertices and their connections. Common representations include the adjacency list, adjacency matrix, and edge list, each with distinct advantages depending on the graph's density and the specific traversal needs.
The adjacency list is an array of lists (or similar collections) where each index corresponds to a vertex, and the list at that index contains the neighboring vertices connected by edges. This structure is space-efficient for sparse graphs, requiring O(V + E) space, where V is the number of vertices and E is the number of edges, as it only stores existing connections. During traversal, accessing a vertex's neighbors takes O(degree(v)) time, where degree(v) is the number of edges incident to v, making it suitable for iterating over adjacent vertices iteratively.
In contrast, the adjacency matrix uses a two-dimensional array of size V V, where the entry at matrix is true (or 1) if there is an edge from vertex i to j, and false (or 0) otherwise. This representation allows constant-time O(1) queries to check for the existence of a specific edge, which can be beneficial for certain operations, but it consumes O(V) space regardless of the number of edges, rendering it inefficient for sparse graphs. For traversal, retrieving all neighbors of a vertex requires scanning an entire row, taking O(V) time.
The edge list is a straightforward collection of all edges, typically stored as pairs of vertices (u, v) indicating an edge between them. It is simple to implement and useful for initializing a graph or performing operations that process all edges collectively, but it is inefficient for traversal because finding the neighbors of a specific vertex requires scanning the entire list, which takes O(E) time.
Among these, adjacency lists are generally preferred for most graph traversal tasks due to their balance of space efficiency and fast neighbor accessO(degree(v)) versus O(V) for matricesparticularly in sparse graphs where E << V. Adjacency matrices excel in dense graphs or scenarios requiring frequent edge existence checks, while edge lists are best avoided for direct traversal unless the graph is tiny.
These representations can be adapted for directed, undirected, and weighted graphs with minor modifications. For undirected graphs, adjacency lists include each edge in both directions (u in v's list and v in u's list), while matrices are symmetric; for directed graphs, lists store only outgoing edges, and matrices distinguish direction via asymmetric entries. In weighted graphs, adjacency lists extend each neighbor entry to a pair (neighbor, weight), allowing efficient storage and access to edge costs without altering the core structure; matrices can store weights directly in the corresponding cells instead of booleans.

Core Algorithms

Depth-First Search

Depth-first search (DFS) is a graph traversal algorithm that explores as far as possible along each branch before backtracking, effectively simulating a depth-first exploration using a stack data structure, either implicitly through recursion or explicitly in an iterative implementation. This approach systematically visits all vertices reachable from a starting vertex, producing a depth-first forest for disconnected components.
The recursive version of DFS is typically implemented using a procedure that marks the current vertex as visited and recursively calls itself on unvisited neighbors. The following pseudocode outlines the standard recursive DFS for a graph G=(V,E)G = (V, E)G=(V,E), using color coding (white for unvisited, gray for visiting, black for visited) to track states and avoid cycles during traversal:
DFS(G)
1 for each vertex u V
2 color WHITE
3 NIL
4 time 0
5 for each vertex u V
6 if color = WHITE
7 DFS-VISIT(u)

DFS-VISIT(u)
1 color GRAY
2 time time + 1
3 d time
4 for each v Adj
5 if color = WHITE
6 u
7 DFS-VISIT(v)
8 else if color = GRAY
9 // back edge to ancestor
10 color BLACK
11 time time + 1
12 f time
This pseudocode records discovery time ddd and finishing time fff for each vertex uuu, with parent pointers \pi forming the tree edges.
An iterative implementation of DFS uses an explicit stack to mimic the recursion stack, pushing the starting vertex and processing vertices by popping from the stack, marking them visited, and pushing their unvisited neighbors in reverse order to maintain depth-first order. The following pseudocode illustrates iterative DFS for a graph represented as an adjacency list, starting from a given vertex and handling the visited array to skip duplicates:
ITERATIVE-DFS(G, s)
1 visited array of |V| booleans, initialized to false
2 stack empty stack
3 stack.push(s)
4 visited true
5 while stack 
6 u stack.pop()
7 for each v Adj in reverse order
8 if not visited
9 visited true
10 stack.push(v)
This version avoids recursion overhead and is suitable for deep graphs where stack overflow might occur.
In terms of exploration behavior, DFS constructs a depth-first spanning tree (or forest) consisting of tree edges from parent to child and classifies other edges as back edges (to ancestors) or forward/cross edges (in directed graphs), enabling detection of cycles in undirected graphs by identifying back edges to non-parent visited vertices. A graph is acyclic if and only if the DFS forest contains no back edges.
DFS is particularly useful for identifying articulation points (vertices whose removal increases the number of connected components) and bridges (edges whose removal disconnects the graph), achieved by analyzing discovery and low values in the DFS tree: a non-root vertex uuu is an articulation point if it has a child vvv such that no vertex in the subtree rooted at vvv has a back edge to an ancestor of uuu, and an edge (u,v)(u, v)(u,v) is a bridge if the low value of vvv exceeds the discovery time of uuu.

Breadth-First Search

Breadth-first search (BFS) is a fundamental graph traversal algorithm that systematically explores the vertices of a graph level by level, starting from a designated source vertex. It prioritizes visiting all neighbors of a vertex at the current depth before advancing to vertices at greater depths, ensuring a complete exploration of shallower layers prior to deeper ones. This level-order progression is achieved using a queue data structure, which enforces first-in, first-out (FIFO) ordering to manage the set of vertices awaiting exploration. The algorithm marks vertices as visited upon enqueueing to prevent redundant processing and is particularly effective for discovering the structure of graphs in a layered manner.
The core procedure of BFS begins by enqueuing the source vertex and marking it as visited. It then iteratively dequeues a vertex, processes its unvisited neighbors by enqueuing them and marking them visited, and optionally records parent pointers to track the traversal path. This process continues until the queue is empty, at which point all reachable vertices from the source have been visited. A standard pseudocode representation is as follows:
BFS(G, s):
 Initialize queue Q
 Mark s as visited
 Q.enqueue(s)
 parent = null // optional, for path reconstruction
 while Q is not empty:
 v = Q.dequeue()
 for each neighbor w of v (adjacent in G):
 if w is not visited:
 mark w as visited
 Q.enqueue(w)
 parent = v // records the predecessor in the traversal
This implementation ensures that each vertex is enqueued and dequeued exactly once, with neighbor checks occurring only for unvisited vertices.
During execution, BFS constructs a breadth-first spanning tree consisting of the source vertex as the root and tree edges defined by the parent pointers, which connect each visited vertex to its discoverer. In unweighted graphs, these parent pointers enable reconstruction of shortest paths from the source to any reachable vertex, where shortness is measured by the minimal number of edges; this property holds because vertices are explored in strictly increasing order of distance from the source. Unlike depth-first search, which may delve deeply along individual paths before backtracking, BFS maintains a balanced exploration across levels.
To handle graphs with multiple connected components, BFS is invoked repeatedly: after completing a traversal from one source, select an arbitrary unvisited vertex as the new source and repeat until all vertices are visited. Each such invocation identifies one connected component, partitioning the graph accordingly. This iterative application ensures complete coverage of disconnected structures. A key distinction of BFS is its guarantee of minimal edge counts in paths within unweighted graphs, making it the traversal of choice for applications requiring level-based proximity, such as finding the shortest paths in terms of hops.

Properties and Analysis

Time and Space Complexity

In graph traversal algorithms such as depth-first search (DFS) and breadth-first search (BFS), the time complexity for a connected graph is O(V+E)O(V + E)O(V+E), where VVV is the number of vertices and EEE is the number of edges, because each vertex is visited once and each edge is examined a constant number of times during the traversal. This bound holds for both algorithms when implemented with an adjacency-list representation, as the total work involves initializing data structures in O(V)O(V)O(V) time and then processing the adjacency lists, which collectively contain 2E2E2E entries for undirected graphs (or EEE for directed).
To establish this asymptotically, consider a proof sketch by induction on the number of vertices VVV. For the base case with V=1V = 1V=1, the time is O(1)O(1)O(1). Assume the claim holds for graphs with fewer than VVV vertices; in the inductive step, the traversal starts at a source vertex and explores its component, recursing or queuing subtrees/subgraphs where each is processed in time proportional to its size, with the total summing to O(V+E)O(V + E)O(V+E) across all parts, as edges are only crossed once.
The space complexity varies by implementation. Recursive DFS requires O(V)O(V)O(V) space in the worst case due to the recursion stack, which can reach depth VVV in a pathological case like a linear tree (a path graph). Iterative implementations of DFS (using a stack) and BFS (using a queue) both require O(V)O(V)O(V) auxiliary space for the stack or queue, which holds at most VVV vertices at any time, plus O(V)O(V)O(V) for a visited array.
The choice of graph representation affects these complexities. Adjacency lists achieve the tight O(V+E)O(V + E)O(V+E) time bound, as neighbor iteration is proportional to the out-degree, summing to O(E)O(E)O(E) overall, while using O(V+E)O(V + E)O(V+E) space. In contrast, adjacency matrices use O(V2)O(V^2)O(V2) space regardless of EEE, and traversal time becomes O(V2)O(V^2)O(V2) because checking potential edges from each vertex requires O(V)O(V)O(V) operations per vertex, even if many are absent. This makes matrices suitable only for dense graphs where E=(V2)E = \Theta(V^2)E=(V2).
For disconnected graphs, the traversal is extended by iterating over all vertices and initiating a new DFS or BFS from each unvisited one, resulting in a forest of traversal trees; the total time remains O(V+E)O(V + E)O(V+E), as the multiple starting calls add negligible overhead proportional to the number of components, which is at most VVV.

Iterative vs Recursive Implementations

Graph traversal algorithms like depth-first search (DFS) can be implemented recursively, where function calls naturally simulate the stack operations required to explore paths deeply before backtracking. This approach leverages the programming language's call stack to manage the traversal state, resulting in elegant and concise code that mirrors the logical structure of the algorithm. However, recursive DFS carries the risk of stack overflow in graphs with long paths or high recursion depth, exceeding the language's or system's recursion limit, such as in deeply nested structures or large-scale networks.
In contrast, iterative implementations of DFS employ an explicit stack data structure to mimic the recursive call stack, pushing vertices onto the stack for exploration and popping them upon completion. This method avoids recursion-related overhead and eliminates the stack overflow risk, making it preferable in languages with shallow recursion limits or for processing massive graphs where depth could reach thousands of nodes. Iterative versions also offer finer control over visited node tracking and memory allocation, though they often require more verbose code to handle the stack manually. For breadth-first search (BFS), implementations are inherently iterative, relying on a queue to explore levels layer by layer; while a recursive variant is theoretically possible, it is rarely used due to similar recursion depth issues in wide graphs.
The trade-offs between recursive and iterative approaches center on simplicity versus robustness. Recursive code is typically shorter and easier to comprehend, especially for tree-like subgraphs, but it incurs implicit space costs from the call stack, which may not be optimized in all languagesthough tail recursion optimization in functional languages like Scheme can convert qualifying recursive calls to iterative loops, reducing stack usage. Iterative methods, while more explicit, provide better predictability in resource consumption and are essential for production systems handling real-world graphs, such as social networks or web crawls. Best practices recommend iterative DFS for large or unbounded graphs to prevent runtime failures; for instance, converting recursive DFS to iterative involves initializing a stack with the starting vertex, marking it visited, and looping to pop vertices, explore unmarked neighbors by pushing them in reverse order to preserve discovery sequence, and continue until the stack empties.

Advanced Techniques

Graph Exploration Methods

Graph exploration refers to the use of traversal techniques to uncover the structure of unknown or partially known graphs, where the full set of vertices and edges is not initially available to the exploring agent. This process is essential in scenarios like sensor networks, where nodes must discover connectivity through local interactions to map the overall topology.
Key methods for graph exploration include flooding, random walks, and adaptations of depth-first search (DFS). Flooding operates as a broadcast mechanism akin to breadth-first search, where an initiating node sends messages to all neighbors, which in turn forward them until the entire graph is reached or duplicates are detected; this is particularly effective in wireless sensor networks for neighbor discovery and topology construction. Random walks provide a probabilistic approach, with an agent selecting edges at random to traverse the graph, enabling efficient sampling and approximation of unknown structures in large-scale networks without exhaustive coverage. DFS-based methods focus on deep exploration to construct spanning trees in unknown terrains, where the agent advances along unvisited paths and backtracks upon dead ends, systematically building a tree that connects all discovered vertices.
Exploration faces significant challenges, particularly in dynamic graphs where edges may appear or disappear over time, necessitating adaptive re-exploration to maintain an accurate map. In adversarial settings, such as networks with faulty or malicious nodes, agents must incorporate fault-tolerance mechanisms like token-based marking to avoid traps or incomplete coverage. Ensuring completenessverifying that all components have been visitedoften requires strategies like multiple traversals or local bookkeeping to guarantee full graph coverage without prior knowledge.
The roots of graph exploration trace back to 19th-century maze-solving algorithms, such as Trmaux's method, which used markings to avoid cycles while mapping paths. These concepts were formalized in computer science for distributed systems starting in the 1980s, evolving into agent-based exploration models for networks with limited visibility.
Unlike standard graph traversal, which assumes complete adjacency information for mere visitation, exploration emphasizes partial knowledge acquisition and verification, such as confirming exhaustive reachability through spanning tree validation or duplicate detection.

Universal Traversal Sequences

Universal traversal sequences (UTS) are theoretical constructs in graph theory designed to explore unknown graphs without adaptation or prior knowledge of the structure. Formally, for a fixed degree ddd and number of vertices nnn, a (d,n)(d, n)(d,n)-UTS is a fixed sequence over the alphabet {1,2,,d}\{1, 2, \dots, d\}{1,2,,d} such that, in any connected ddd-regular undirected graph with vertices labeled 111 to nnn and edges incident to each vertex distinctly labeled 111 to ddd, starting from any vertex and following the sequence by traversing the edge with the corresponding label at each step will visit every vertex at least once. This non-adaptive nature distinguishes UTS from algorithms like depth-first search or breadth-first search, which adjust their path based on local graph information.
The concept of UTS emerged from efforts to derandomize random walk algorithms for graph connectivity. In 1979, Aleliunas et al. demonstrated that a random walk of length O(n3logn)O(n^3 \log n)O(n3logn) covers any connected undirected graph on nnn vertices with high probability, implying the existence of deterministic sequences of similar length via the probabilistic method; this randomized approach placed undirected s-t connectivity in the complexity class RL (randomized logspace). Motivated by Stephen Cook to study space lower bounds for graph problems, deterministic UTS were formalized as a way to achieve the same coverage deterministically, though their construction proved more challenging than the randomized case.
Constructions of UTS draw inspiration from de Bruijn sequences, which generate all possible subsequences of a given length over an alphabet, adapted here to the universal cover of all possible ddd-regular graphs on nnn vertices. A seminal construction for complete graphs (cliques, where d=n1d = n-1d=n1) was provided by Karloff, Paturi, and Simon in 1988, yielding sequences of length nO(logn)n^{O(\log n)}nO(logn) that can be generated in polynomial time; this was extended to general ddd-regular graphs using similar recursive techniques on expander families or Cayley graphs. Lower bounds show that no shorter sequences suffice in the worst case, with lengths at least (d2n2+dn2log(n/d))\Omega(d^2 n^2 + d n^2 \log (n/d))(d2n2+dn2log(n/d)) for 3dn/323 \leq d \leq n/3 - 23dn/32, confirming that UTS cannot be polynomial-length for arbitrary graphs.
In theoretical computer science, UTS play a key role in analyzing space-bounded computation, particularly for undirected graph reachability. A polynomial-length UTS constructible in logarithmic space would place undirected s-t connectivity in L (deterministic logspace), fully derandomizing the Aleliunas et al. result and resolving whether L = RL; current constructions achieve quasipolynomial length but require more space to generate, leaving the question open. They also inform time-space tradeoffs in graph exploration models, such as pebble automata, where UTS length bounds imply lower limits on computational resources for non-adaptive traversal.
Despite their theoretical elegance, UTS are impractical for graphs with more than a few dozen vertices due to their superpolynomial length, which grows as n(logn)n^{\Theta(\log n)}n(logn) in known constructions, far exceeding the linear-time efficiency of adaptive methods like DFS or BFS. This highlights a fundamental tradeoff: while UTS provide a universal, blind strategy for any graph in a class, their size renders them unusable beyond abstract analysis.

Applications

Computing and Data Structures

Graph traversal algorithms, particularly depth-first search (DFS) and breadth-first search (BFS), are fundamental for identifying connected components in undirected graphs, where each component represents a maximal subgraph in which every pair of vertices is connected by a path. To compute these components, one initiates a DFS or BFS from an arbitrary unvisited vertex, marking all reachable vertices as part of the current component, and repeats the process for any remaining unvisited vertices until the entire graph is partitioned. This approach serves as an alternative to union-find structures for connectivity queries in scenarios requiring explicit subgraph identification, such as network partitioning in distributed systems.
Cycle detection leverages DFS with a three-color marking schemewhite for unvisited vertices, gray for vertices currently in the recursion stack, and black for fully explored verticesto identify back edges that indicate cycles. In undirected graphs, a back edge connects to a gray or black ancestor, signaling a cycle, while in directed graphs, encountering a gray vertex during traversal confirms a cycle via a path back to an active node. This method ensures efficient detection without exhaustive path enumeration, crucial for validating acyclicity in dependency graphs or constraint satisfaction problems.
For directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), topological sorting uses DFS to order vertices based on finishing times, where a vertex's position in the sequence reflects the completion of all its outgoing traversals, ensuring that for every directed edge from u to v, u precedes v in the ordering. The algorithm performs DFS on the DAG, recording vertices in reverse postorder (i.e., upon finishing), which resolves dependencies in tasks like build systems or instruction scheduling. This DFS-based technique guarantees a valid linear extension of the partial order defined by the edges, provided no cycles exist.
In data structures, graph traversal extends naturally to trees, which are acyclic connected graphs, enabling serialization by systematically visiting nodes to encode the structure into a linear format, such as preorder traversal that records root values followed by subtrees. This process facilitates storage or transmission of tree-based structures like parse trees or file systems, with deserialization reconstructing the tree by reversing the traversal order. Similarly, garbage collection in languages like Java employs a mark-and-sweep algorithm, which uses a traversal starting from root references to mark reachable objects, followed by sweeping unmarked (unreachable) objects for reclamation, preventing memory leaks in managed environments.
A specific application arises in compiler optimizations, where control flow graphs (CFGs)directed graphs representing possible execution paths in codeare traversed using DFS or BFS to perform dead code elimination by identifying unreachable or unused basic blocks. For instance, starting from entry points, traversal marks live code paths, allowing removal of nodes not contributing to program output, which reduces executable size and improves runtime efficiency without altering semantics. This technique, integral to optimizing intermediate representations, relies on precise flow analysis to propagate liveness information across the graph.

Real-World Uses

Graph traversal algorithms find extensive applications in social networks, where breadth-first search (BFS) is commonly employed to compute shortest paths and degrees of separation for friend recommendations. For instance, BFS can identify mutual connections up to a few hops from a user, enabling suggestions based on the "six degrees of separation" principle observed in platforms like Facebook, where average path lengths between users are around 3.5 to 4.7. Depth-first search (DFS) can support community detection by exploring deeply into densely connected subgroups, helping to partition networks into clusters of similar interests or interactions.
In web crawling, BFS systematically explores hyperlinks starting from seed URLs, ensuring comprehensive indexing of web pages level by level to build large-scale search engine databases. This approach was foundational to Google's early crawler, which used a distributed variant to fetch and store over 24 million pages by prioritizing fresh and relevant content via URL frontiers.
Bioinformatics leverages graph traversal to analyze metabolic pathways modeled as directed graphs of biochemical reactions and compounds. DFS is particularly useful for enumerating alternative pathways from precursors to targets, aiding in the discovery of potential drug intervention points by identifying essential enzymes or bottlenecks in disease-related networks. For example, iterative graph traversal algorithms have been applied to predict drug targets in cancer metabolism by simulating flux disruptions in reconstructed human metabolic models.
Transportation systems utilize BFS for shortest-path routing in unweighted or discretized road networks, powering GPS applications to compute efficient routes in urban grids. Variants of shortest path algorithms incorporating turn penalties have been shown to generate paths with fewer direction changes while minimizing distance, improving navigation in real-time traffic scenarios like those in Beijing's road network.
Recent advancements integrate graph traversal with AI, as in graph neural networks (GNNs) for node classification tasks, where message-passing mechanisms akin to localized traversals propagate features across edges to classify entities in social or biological graphs. In epidemic modeling, traversal algorithms simulate disease spread on contact graphs, with BFS and DFS variants optimizing contact tracing by exploring infection chains bidirectionally to isolate cases efficiently.

References

19.3. Graph Traversals OpenDSA Data Structures and Algorithms ...

https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs2110/2025fa/lectures/lec22

Graph Algorithms | CSE 373 - Washington

 Chapter 13 Graph Search

 Graph: representation and traversal

 Chapter 9: Graph Algorithms

 Graph Traversal Objective

3. Graph traversal - Temple CIS

Basic Graph Algorithms - cs.wisc.edu

 Early Writings on Graph Theory: Euler Circuits and The Knigsberg ...

 A Work-Efficient Parallel Breadth-First Search Algorithm (or How to ...

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4569669

Graph traversals - CS@Cornell

GraphAlgorithms

Transcript Basic Graphs

Graph Representations and Traversals - Cornell: Computer Science

19.1. Graphs Chapter Introduction - OpenDSA

12. Graphs and Digraphs 

CS106B Graph Algorithms - Stanford University

Graph algorithms

 22 Elementary Graph Algorithms

 223 Depth-first search - Introduction to Algorithms

Depth-First Search and Linear Graph Algorithms | SIAM Journal on ...

Undirected Graphs

Introduction to Algorithms - MIT Press

2 Graphs - CS@Cornell

 Lecture 17: Graph Traversals CSE 373: Data Structures and

Notes on Data Structures and Programming Techniques (CPSC 223 ...

SI335: Graph Algorithms - Depth-first search revisited

Transcript Graphs 2 (DFS and BFS)

 Chapter 5 Graphs and Recursion

(PDF) Exploring an Unknown Graph Efficiently - ResearchGate

Dynamic graph-based search in unknown environments

 WSNA'02: Rumor Routing Algorithm For Sensor Networks

A Low-Cost Flooding Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks

 Random Walks on Graphs: A Survey

BloomWalk and CuckooWalk: Fast Random Walks Utilizing ...

 Exploring Unknown Undirected Graphs

 Exploration of dynamic networks - University of Ottawa

Fault-Tolerant Exploration of an Unknown Dangerous Graph by ...

 Minimizing State Exploration While Searching Graphs with Unknown ...

Maze Solving Algorithm | Encyclopedia MDPI

 Automated classification of distributed graph problems - Aaltodoc

 ALGORITHMS FOR EXPLORING AN UNKNOWN GRAPH

 UNIVERSAL TRAVERSAL SEQUENCES OF LENGTH noUogn ...

 Random Walks and Universal Sequences

 ILower Bounds on the Length of Universal Traversal Sequences

 Universal Traversal Sequences - Computer Science

 Time-Space Tradeoffs for Undirected Graph Traversal by Graph ...

 Universal Traversal Sequences for Expander Graphs

 mccarthy.pdf - cs.wisc.edu

 Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools

 Evaluating Social Networks Using Task-Focused Network ... - arXiv

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/03081079.2024.2422094

Enumerating all possible biosynthetic pathways in metabolic networks

 An Iterative Algorithm for Metabolic Network-Based Drug Target ...

A fewest-turn-and-shortest path algorithm based on breadth-first ...

Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion