gRPC Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
gRPC
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 gRPC is a modern, open-source, high-performance remote procedure call (RPC) framework that enables efficient communication between services in distributed systems, allowing developers to define services and call methods remotely as if they were local. Developed internally at Google as an evolution of its Stubby RPC infrastructure and first open-sourced in February 2015, hosted by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF), gRPC leverages HTTP/2 for transport and Protocol Buffers (specifically proto3) as its interface definition language for serializing structured data, supporting bidirectional streaming and multiple RPC patterns including unary, server-streaming, client-streaming, and bidirectional-streaming calls. It generates client and server stubs in a wide array of programming languagessuch as C++, Java, Python, Go, Ruby, C#, Node.js, and othersfacilitating polyglot microservices architectures while providing built-in support for features like deadlines, cancellation, metadata propagation, and pluggable authentication mechanisms. The framework's 1.0 stable release arrived in August 2016, marking its maturity for production use across cloud-native environments, and it has since become a cornerstone for inter-service communication in large-scale applications due to its efficiency in bandwidth usage and low latency.

Fundamentals

Definition and Purpose

gRPC is a modern, open-source, high-performance Remote Procedure Call (RPC) framework initially developed by Google. It enables client and server applications to communicate transparently across different environments, from data centers to mobile devices, by allowing remote method calls to behave like local function invocations.
The core purpose of gRPC is to provide a language-agnostic mechanism for defining services using an Interface Definition Language (IDL), generating idiomatic client and server code across multiple programming languages, and managing transport via HTTP/2 with Protocol Buffers for efficient data serialization. This approach streamlines the development of distributed systems by abstracting low-level network complexities, such as connection management and message encoding, so developers can focus on business logic.
Key benefits include low-latency communication, support for bidirectional streaming, and enhanced scalability, making gRPC particularly suitable for microservices architectures and high-throughput applications. By leveraging HTTP/2's multiplexing and Protocol Buffers' compact binary format, it achieves efficient resource utilization without sacrificing performance.

High-Level Architecture

gRPC's high-level architecture is layered to enable efficient remote procedure calls, abstracting network complexities while supporting high-performance communication. At the core is the interface definition layer, where developers specify services and data structures using Protocol Buffers (.proto files), an Interface Definition Language (IDL) that describes methods, parameters, and return types. From these definitions, code generation tools like the Protocol Buffers compiler (protoc) produce language-specific client stubs and server skeletons, facilitating implementation in languages such as Java, Python, Go, and C++. The transport layer leverages HTTP/2 for multiplexing, bidirectional streaming, and flow control, ensuring low-latency and reliable data exchange over networks.
The end-to-end data flow in a unary RPC begins when a client application invokes a method on the generated stub, which serializes the request payload into a compact binary format using Protocol Buffers and encapsulates it within HTTP/2 frames for transmission to the server endpoint. Upon receipt, the server's implementation deserializes the message, executes the corresponding service logic to process the request, serializes the response similarly, and transmits it back via HTTP/2 frames to the client. The client's stub then deserializes the incoming response and delivers the result to the application, completing the request-response cycle in a manner that mimics a local function call.
Client and server stubs serve as proxies that conceal the underlying transport and serialization details, allowing developers to focus on business logic without managing low-level networking concerns such as connection management, framing, or error handling. This abstraction promotes portability across languages and environments, as the stubs ensure type safety and consistency derived from the shared .proto definitions.

Underlying Technologies

Protocol Buffers for Data Serialization

Protocol Buffers, commonly known as protobuf, is a binary serialization format developed by Google for encoding structured data in an efficient, extensible manner. It provides a language-neutral and platform-neutral method to define data structures using a simple interface definition language, which are then compiled into code for various programming languages to handle serialization and deserialization. This format is particularly suited for high-performance applications, as it uses a compact binary encoding that minimizes storage and transmission overhead compared to text-based alternatives.
Key features of Protocol Buffers include support for schema evolution, enabling forward and backward compatibility during updates to data structures without breaking existing implementations. This is achieved through rules that allow adding, removing, or modifying fields while ensuring that older and newer versions of the schema can interoperate seamlessly. Additionally, it offers compact binary encoding, which results in payloads that are significantly smaller and faster to process than those in formats like JSON or XML. Protocol Buffers supports generated code in multiple languages, including C++, Java, Python, Go, and others, facilitating cross-language data exchange.
In the context of gRPC, Protocol Buffers serves as the default mechanism for data serialization, where messages defined in .proto files are compiled into language-specific classes using the protocol buffer compiler (protoc). These classes provide methods to serialize objects into binary format for transmission and deserialize them upon receipt, ensuring efficient handling of RPC payloads. For instance, a simple message might encode an integer field using a variable-length encoding scheme known as varints, which optimizes space for small values.
Protocol Buffers excels in managing complex data types, such as enums for defining a fixed set of named values, nested messages for hierarchical structures, and oneof constructs for selecting one among multiple possible fields to avoid redundancy. Enums are serialized as integer tags, allowing efficient representation of options like status codes. Nested messages enable composition, where one message embeds another, supporting deeply structured data like trees or graphs. The oneof feature ensures that only one variant is set at a time, which is serialized by including only the active field's tag and value, promoting schema clarity and reducing payload size. These capabilities make Protocol Buffers ideal for defining gRPC service interfaces and messages, with .proto files serving as the central definition point.
Regarding performance, Protocol Buffers typically reduce payload sizes by a factor of 3 to 10 compared to JSON for structured data, due to its tag-length-value encoding that omits field names and uses dense binary representation. Serialization and deserialization are also faster, as the binary format avoids parsing overhead inherent in text formats, leading to lower latency in network-bound scenarios like RPC calls.

HTTP/2 Transport

gRPC utilizes HTTP/2 as its primary transport protocol, leveraging its core features to enable efficient, high-performance remote procedure calls. HTTP/2 introduces binary framing, which encodes all communications as binary data broken into frames for transmission, replacing the text-based format of HTTP/1.1 to improve parsing efficiency and reduce errors. This framing layer allows for the multiplexing of multiple concurrent streams over a single TCP connection, preventing head-of-line blocking that occurs in HTTP/1.1 where responses must arrive in order. Additionally, HTTP/2 employs HPACK for header compression, which dynamically compresses HTTP headers to minimize redundancy and bandwidth usage across repeated requests on the same connection.
In gRPC, each remote procedure call (RPC) is mapped directly to a single HTTP/2 stream, allowing independent processing of multiple RPCs without interfering with one another. For unary RPCs, the client initiates a POST request with pseudo-headers such as :method set to POST and :path formatted as the service method path (e.g., /package.Service/Method), along with a content-type of application/grpc; the request body contains the serialized Protocol Buffer message prefixed by a single-byte compression flag and a four-byte message length. Streaming RPCs extend this model by utilizing bidirectional HTTP/2 streams, where both client and server can interleave frames containing messages, initial metadata, and trailers asynchronously over the same stream.
These HTTP/2 features provide significant advantages for gRPC's performance. Multiplexing enables multiple RPCs to proceed concurrently over one connection, reducing latency by eliminating the need for parallel TCP connections and mitigating head-of-line blocking for independent operations. HTTP/2's per-stream and connection-level flow control mechanisms allow precise management of data transmission rates, preventing network congestion and ensuring efficient resource utilization in high-throughput scenarios. Server push capability in HTTP/2 further supports gRPC by allowing servers to proactively send response data, though gRPC primarily relies on client-initiated streams for RPC semantics.
As of November 2025, gRPC also provides experimental support for HTTP/3, which uses QUIC over UDP to offer improved performance in high-latency or lossy networks by reducing head-of-line blocking at the transport level. This support is being scaled in production environments, such as at Cloudflare, but HTTP/2 remains the primary transport.
In certain environments, such as web browsers where native HTTP/2 support may be limited or proxies are involved, gRPC falls back to gRPC-Web, which adapts the protocol to work over HTTP/1.1 while maintaining compatibility with gRPC backends via intermediaries like Envoy for protocol translation. HTTP/2 deployments, including those for gRPC, commonly require TLS encryption to address security vulnerabilities in unencrypted connections, ensuring confidentiality and integrity of RPC communications.

Interface Definition

.proto Files

gRPC uses Protocol Buffers (protobuf) syntax in .proto files as its Interface Definition Language (IDL), with version 3 (proto3) being the recommended syntax for defining the structure of data messages and service interfaces, specifying RPC contracts. This syntax provides a language-agnostic way to describe data schemas and methods, enabling code generation across multiple programming languages. The proto3 format is the recommended version for gRPC, offering simplified rules compared to proto2 while maintaining backward compatibility for core features.
A .proto file begins with the syntax declaration syntax = "proto3"; to indicate the version being used. Message definitions form the core of data structures, declared using the message keyword followed by the message name and a block of fields. Each field specifies a typesuch as scalar types like int32 for 32-bit integers, string for UTF-8 strings, or bool for booleansa unique field number for serialization purposes (starting from 1), and the field name. For collections, the repeated modifier allows arrays of the specified type, e.g., repeated string tags = 2;. Fields can also reference other messages or enums, promoting modular designs. Enums are defined with the enum keyword, listing named values with integer assignments, where the first value defaults to 0 if unspecified, e.g., enum Status { UNKNOWN = 0; SUCCESS = 1; ERROR = 2; }.
Service definitions outline the RPC endpoints, using the service keyword followed by the service name and a block containing rpc declarations. Each RPC method specifies a name, an input message type in parentheses, the returns keyword, and an output message type, e.g., rpc SayHello(HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply);. For streaming RPCs, the stream modifier is applied to input, output, or both, e.g., rpc Chat(stream ChatMessage) returns (stream ChatMessage); for bidirectional streaming. Options enhance organization and customization; the package directive namespaces the definitions, such as package helloworld;, to avoid naming conflicts across files. Imports allow referencing external .proto files with import "path/to/other.proto";, enabling composition of complex interfaces from reusable components.
The following snippet illustrates a basic .proto file for a Greeter service:
syntax = "proto3";

package helloworld;

import "google/protobuf/empty.proto"; // Optional import for standard types

message HelloRequest {
 string name = 1;
}

message HelloReply {
 string message = 1;
}

service Greeter {
 rpc SayHello(HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply);
}
This example defines two simple messages for request and response payloads, along with a unary RPC method in the service block, demonstrating the concise syntax for gRPC interface specification.

Service and Message Definitions

In gRPC, messages serve as the core data structures for defining the payload exchanged between client and server in RPC calls. These messages are specified using Protocol Buffers (protobuf), which allows developers to describe structured data with fields of various types, including scalars, enums, nested messages, and repeated fields for lists. Messages are designed to be reusable, enabling the same definition to be applied as input for requests, output for responses, or even within other messages, which fosters modularity and reduces redundancy across services.
Validation rules for messages can be enforced through protobuf's built-in features or custom options, such as using the optional keyword in proto3 for fields that may be absent, or integrating third-party extensions like protovalidate to check constraints like required presence, string lengths, or numeric ranges at runtime. For instance, custom options can annotate fields to indicate they are mandatory, triggering validation logic in the generated code or interceptors, though proto3 treats all fields as optional by default to support forward compatibility.
Services in gRPC act as formal contracts that encapsulate one or more RPC methods, outlining the interface for remote procedure calls. Each service groups related methods, where every RPC specifies an input message type, an output message type, and the communication patternsuch as unary (single request and single response), server-streaming (single request followed by multiple responses), client-streaming (multiple requests followed by a single response), or bidirectional streaming (multiple requests and responses interleaved). This structure ensures type-safe, contract-driven interactions, with the service definition serving as the shared schema between clients and servers.
Best practices for defining services and messages emphasize maintainability and scalability. Versioning is achieved by incorporating version indicators in the package namespace of the .proto file, such as package chat.v1;, allowing evolution of APIs without breaking existing clients. Packages provide namespaces to organize definitions and prevent naming conflicts, especially in large-scale systems with multiple services. For handling large messages that exceed typical payload limits or require real-time processing, developers are advised to decompose them into streams rather than monolithic structures, leveraging streaming RPC types to transmit data incrementally.
A representative example is a streaming service for a chat application, where the service might be defined to support bidirectional communication. The service could include an RPC method like Chat that takes a stream of ChatMessage inputs (each containing fields like sender, timestamp, and text) and returns a stream of the same message type, enabling ongoing message exchange between participants without predefined message counts. This design semantically captures the conversational nature of chat while reusing the message structure for both sending and receiving.

Communication Patterns

Unary RPCs

Unary RPCs represent the simplest communication pattern in gRPC, where a client sends a single request message to the server and receives a single response message in return. This pattern mirrors traditional function calls or HTTP POST requests, making it ideal for straightforward interactions without the need for ongoing data exchange.
The flow of a unary RPC begins when the client invokes a stub method on the generated client code, which initiates an HTTP/2 stream to the server. The server receives initial metadata, including the method name and any deadlines, before processing the incoming request message. Upon completion of processing, the server sends the response message along with trailing metadata and a status code; if the status is OK, the client receives the response and the RPC concludes. Deadlines and timeouts can be set on the client side to prevent indefinite waits, ensuring reliable operation in distributed systems.
Common use cases for unary RPCs include simple queries, such as retrieving user information, and basic CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations where a single request suffices to perform the action and return a result. For instance, a service might define a unary method like rpc SayHello(HelloRequest) returns (HelloResponse); to handle a greeting exchange.
In terms of performance, unary RPCs are efficient for their intended scenarios due to the use of a single HTTP/2 stream, minimizing overhead compared to more complex patterns. They support both synchronous blocking calls, which wait for the response, and asynchronous variants for non-blocking execution. Reusing channels and stubs further optimizes throughput for repeated unary calls.

Streaming RPCs

gRPC supports three types of streaming RPCs, enabling efficient handling of multiple messages over a single connection, which contrasts with the single request-response pattern of unary RPCs. These include server-streaming RPCs, client-streaming RPCs, and bidirectional-streaming RPCs.
In a server-streaming RPC, the client sends a single request to the server, which responds with a stream of messages. The client reads from this stream until the server signals completion by closing the stream. This pattern is suitable for scenarios where the server needs to deliver a potentially large or dynamic dataset, such as paginated results or real-time updates like live stock quotes. For example, in the official RouteGuide service, the ListFeatures method uses server-streaming to return a sequence of geographic features within a specified rectangle.
A client-streaming RPC allows the client to send multiple requests as a stream to the server, which processes them and returns a single response upon completion. The client closes the stream after sending all messages, prompting the server's final reply. This is ideal for aggregating data from the client side, such as uploading a series of files or points for analysis. An example is the RecordRoute method in RouteGuide, where the client streams a sequence of route points, and the server computes a summary like total distance.
Bidirectional-streaming RPCs enable independent streams of messages in both directions over the same connection, allowing client and server to read and write asynchronously without strict ordering. This facilitates interactive, real-time applications resembling WebSocket connections, such as chat systems. In the RouteGuide example, RouteChat implements this by having the client stream its location and receive relevant historical notes from the server in an interleaved manner.
Mechanically, streaming RPCs leverage HTTP/2's bidirectional stream capabilities, with each RPC mapped to an individual HTTP/2 stream. Messages are serialized using Protocol Buffers and sent as length-prefixed payloads within HTTP/2 DATA frames. The end of a message stream is indicated by setting the END_STREAM flag on the final DATA frame, signaling closure to the peer.
To manage resource usage in streaming scenarios, gRPC employs HTTP/2 flow control for backpressure handling. This mechanism uses window sizes to regulate data flow: the receiver acknowledges processed data via WINDOW_UPDATE frames, informing the sender of available buffer capacity. If the sender exceeds the window, it pauses transmission until acknowledgments arrive, preventing overload and data loss while maintaining reliability in long-lived streams.

Security and Authentication

TLS Integration

gRPC integrates Transport Layer Security (TLS) to secure communications over HTTP/2, enforcing TLS 1.2 as the minimum supported version in compliance with HTTP/2 specifications and extending support to TLS 1.3 for enhanced performance and security where available. This setup encrypts all data exchanged between clients and servers, safeguarding against eavesdropping, tampering, and man-in-the-middle attacks, while also enabling server authentication to verify endpoint identities. In production environments, TLS is essential to ensure confidentiality and integrity of RPC traffic.
Configuration of TLS in gRPC involves providing server certificates signed by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA) for server-side authentication, with clients configured to verify these certificates using root CA bundles. For mutual TLS (mTLS), clients present their own certificates during the handshake, allowing servers to authenticate clients as well; this is achieved through options like SslCredentials in various language libraries, which support specifying certificate chains, private keys, and root CAs. Cipher suites can be customized via TLS options to prioritize secure algorithms, such as those offering perfect forward secrecy, ensuring compatibility with organizational security policies.
A gRPC-specific feature is the use of Server Name Indication (SNI) during the TLS handshake, where the client specifies the target hostname (e.g., myservice.example.com) to enable secure virtual hosting of multiple services on a single IP address and port. This allows gRPC servers to select the appropriate certificate based on the requested name, facilitating efficient multi-tenancy without compromising security. While TLS provides the foundational transport-layer security, higher-level authentication mechanisms can be applied atop it for finer-grained access control.

Authentication Mechanisms

gRPC provides application-level authentication mechanisms that operate above the transport layer, allowing clients to authenticate individual RPCs or entire channels using metadata propagated with requests. Channel credentials establish authentication for all RPCs on a given channel and are typically composed with transport security mechanisms such as TLS to form composite credentials. These credentials encapsulate the necessary state for server authentication, ensuring secure connection establishment without per-call overhead.
Call credentials, in contrast, enable per-RPC authentication by attaching credential data to request metadata, which is then verified by the server for each invocation. Common examples include OAuth 2.0 access tokens or API keys passed in headers like the authorization metadata field, allowing fine-grained control over individual calls. For instance, a client can use call credentials to include a bearer token in the metadata, which the server extracts and validates against an identity provider.
gRPC supports custom authentication logic through interceptors, which allow developers to intercept outgoing client requests or incoming server invocations to add or verify authentication headers dynamically. Client-side interceptors can automatically populate metadata with tokens, while server-side interceptors enforce validation, such as checking the Authorization header for validity before proceeding. This extensibility facilitates integration with various token formats, including JSON Web Tokens (JWT) for stateless authentication.
In Google Cloud environments, gRPC natively supports service account authentication using OAuth 2.0 tokens derived from service account credentials, often via the Google Auth library. These tokens, typically JWTs signed by the service account's private key, are attached as call credentials to authorize inter-service communication. This mechanism ensures secure, identity-aware RPCs within cloud infrastructures without requiring additional middleware.

Encoding and Compression

Default Encoding

gRPC employs Protocol Buffers (Protobuf) as its default encoding mechanism for serializing structured data in messages, providing a compact binary format optimized for network transmission.
The Protobuf wire format uses variable-length integer encoding, known as varints, for integers such as int32 and int64, which allows small values to be represented with fewer bytesfor instance, the value 150 is encoded as the two-byte sequence \x96\x01. Strings, bytes, and nested messages are encoded as length-delimited types, where a varint specifies the length of the payload followed by the actual data bytes; for example, the string "hello" is prefixed with its length 5 (encoded as \x05) and then the UTF-8 bytes. Each field is preceded by a tag, a varint combining the field number (shifted left by 3 bits) and a wire type (e.g., 0 for varint, 2 for length-delimited), ensuring efficient parsing without requiring the full schema at runtime.
In gRPC, this Protobuf payload is framed within HTTP/2 DATA frames as a length-prefixed message: the body begins with a 1-byte compressed flag (0 for uncompressed, 1 for compressed), followed by a 4-byte big-endian unsigned integer indicating the message length (up to 4 GB), and then the Protobuf-encoded message itself. This framing enables reliable streaming and demultiplexing of messages over persistent HTTP/2 connections.
Protobuf is the default encoding in gRPC due to its binary efficiency, which reduces payload size and serialization/deserialization overhead compared to text-based formats like JSON, while providing strong type safety through schema-defined messages that validate data structure across languages. There is no built-in human-readable alternative, as the focus remains on performance-critical, machine-to-machine communication. Compression can be applied atop this base encoding for further optimization.

Compression Options

gRPC supports per-message compression to minimize bandwidth consumption during communication between clients and servers. This compression operates on individual payloads after serialization, typically using Protocol Buffers as the default encoding, and is indicated via flags in the gRPC wire format frames. The standard algorithms include gzip and deflate, where deflate specifically employs the zlib structure with deflate compression as defined in RFC 1950 and RFC 1951.
Compression configuration is flexible, allowing settings at the channel level for default behavior or overridden on a per-RPC basis for specific calls. At the channel level, developers can enable or disable compression globally, while per-RPC options permit granular control, such as compressing only requests or responses asymmetrically. When no per-RPC setting is specified, the channel default applies. Additionally, HTTP/2's built-in HPACK algorithm handles header compression automatically, reducing metadata overhead without explicit configuration in gRPC.
While compression yields significant bandwidth savingsoften 50-90% reduction for text-heavy payloads depending on data patternsit introduces CPU overhead for encoding and decoding operations. This trade-off can degrade performance in CPU-bound scenarios or applications prioritizing low latency, such as real-time systems, where disabling compression may be preferable to avoid added processing delays.
For advanced use cases, gRPC enables custom compressors through registration mechanisms in language-specific libraries, allowing integration of algorithms like Snappy or Brotli. Interceptors provide further extensibility, permitting developers to intercept messages and apply bespoke compression logic before transmission, though this requires careful implementation to maintain compatibility with gRPC's wire protocol.

Error Handling

gRPC Status Codes

gRPC employs a standardized set of status codes to indicate the outcome of RPC operations, defined in the google.rpc.Code enum within the status.proto file. These codes form the core of gRPC's error model, providing a consistent way for servers to report success or failure to clients. The status is represented by an integer value ranging from 0 to 16, where 0 denotes success and higher values indicate specific error conditions. This design draws from HTTP status codes but is tailored for RPC semantics, ensuring interoperability across languages and implementations.
The full list of canonical status codes is as follows:
CodeNameDescription
0OKThe operation completed successfully. This is the only code that signifies success; all others indicate errors. For example, a unary RPC that returns the expected response uses this code.
1CANCELLEDThe operation was explicitly cancelled by the client or server. This might occur if a deadline is exceeded or if the caller aborts the request midway.
2UNKNOWNAn unknown error occurred, often due to internal server issues not fitting other categories. It serves as a catch-all for unexpected failures, such as system errors like Enosys.
3INVALID_ARGUMENTThe client provided invalid input, such as malformed request data or parameters outside acceptable ranges. For instance, passing a negative value where a positive integer is required triggers this code.
4DEADLINE_EXCEEDEDThe operation timed out before completion, typically because the deadline set by the client expired. This is common in network latency scenarios or long-running computations.
5NOT_FOUNDThe requested resource or entity does not exist. An example is querying a non-existent user ID in a user service.
6ALREADY_EXISTSThe operation attempted to create a resource that already exists, such as trying to register a duplicate username.
7PERMISSION_DENIEDThe caller lacks sufficient permissions to perform the operation, even if the resource exists. This differs from NOT_FOUND to prevent information leakage.
8RESOURCE_EXHAUSTEDThe service has reached its quota or resource limit, such as exceeding API call limits per user.
9FAILED_PRECONDITIONThe operation failed due to a precondition not being met, like attempting to update a resource that has been modified since the last read.
10ABORTEDThe operation was aborted, often due to concurrency issues like transaction conflicts in a database.
11OUT_OF_RANGEThe input parameter is not within the valid range, such as an index beyond array bounds.
12UNIMPLEMENTEDThe method or operation is not implemented by the server. For example, calling an experimental API endpoint.
13INTERNALAn internal server error occurred, typically transient and not exposing details to clients for security reasons.
14UNAVAILABLEThe service is currently unavailable, often due to maintenance, overload, or network issues. Retries may resolve this.
15DATA_LOSSUnrecoverable data loss or corruption occurred during the operation, such as a failed write to persistent storage.
16UNAUTHENTICATEDThe request did not include valid authentication credentials. This precedes PERMISSION_DENIED in the authentication flow.
These codes are generated by application logic or the gRPC library and are immutable once set. Servers must use them to communicate outcomes, while clients receive them in the returned status object.
In addition to the code and an optional human-readable message, the status can include trailerskey-value metadata sent at the end of the HTTP/2 response or stream. Trailers allow servers to attach additional context, such as debugging information or custom error details, without altering the core status code. For streaming RPCs, the status and trailers appear after all messages have been sent, ensuring the final outcome is clear. Propagation of these statuses to clients follows gRPC's error handling mechanisms, as detailed in the error propagation section.

Error Propagation

In gRPC, errors occurring on the server are propagated to the client through a combination of status codes and optional descriptive messages, which are transmitted in HTTP/2 trailers to ensure reliable delivery even if the response body is incomplete. This mechanism allows the server to signal failure conditions after sending initial headers or partial response data, preventing the client from misinterpreting incomplete responses as success.
For unary RPCs, where a single request elicits a single response, the server includes the status code (e.g., OK for success or an error code otherwise) and any message in the trailers following the response message; if an error arises before the full response is sent, the trailers provide the error details immediately after available data. In contrast, streaming RPCssuch as server-streaming, client-streaming, or bidirectionalhandle errors by terminating the stream with a status in the trailers, often accompanied by stream cancellation to halt further message exchange and free resources on both sides. For instance, in a server-streaming call, the server may send multiple messages before encountering an error, at which point it closes the stream with an error status, allowing the client to process received messages prior to handling the failure.
On the client side, errors can originate from deadlines, cancellations, or network issues, with propagation managed through context propagation and interceptors for advanced handling like retries. Clients set deadlines to bound RPC duration, and if exceeded, the server automatically cancels the call with a CANCELLED status, propagating the DEADLINE_EXCEEDED error back to the client. Cancellations, triggered by client-side logic or I/O failures, use HTTP/2 mechanisms to signal the server to abort processing, resulting in a CANCELLED status for both parties. Interceptors enable client-side interception of errors for custom logic, such as automatic retries on transient failures, by wrapping calls and modifying contexts without altering core RPC semantics.
gRPC maps certain HTTP/2 errors to RPC-level failures, notably using RST_STREAM frames for abrupt stream termination, which the runtime interprets as an immediate closure and propagates as an UNKNOWN or INTERNAL status to the application. This ensures that low-level transport errors, like connection resets, are elevated to application-visible gRPC statuses without losing context.
Best practices for error propagation emphasize adopting rich error models to convey structured details beyond basic status codes, particularly by using the google.rpc.Status protobuf message, which includes a code, message, and optional details field for embedding custom protobuf error payloads. Servers encode these rich errors into trailers via the grpc-status and grpc-message keys (or binary-encoded details), allowing clients to parse and handle nuanced failures, such as validation specifics, while maintaining backward compatibility with standard gRPC libraries. This approach, supported across languages, facilitates interoperable error reporting without relying on ad-hoc metadata.

Development Tools

Code Generation

gRPC employs the Protocol Buffers compiler, protoc, augmented by language-specific gRPC plugins to automate code generation from service definitions specified in .proto files. This process transforms abstract interface definitions into concrete, type-safe implementations tailored to the target programming language, enabling developers to focus on business logic rather than low-level RPC handling.
The primary outputs of this compilation include client stubs that facilitate remote procedure calls, server base classes or interfaces for implementing service endpoints, and message classes equipped with methods for serialization, deserialization, and validation of structured data. These generated artifacts ensure consistency between client and server implementations while leveraging Protocol Buffers' efficient binary encoding. For instance, in a typical workflow, running protoc with the appropriate plugin flags produces these components directly from the .proto schema.
gRPC provides official protoc plugins for more than 10 languages, encompassing C++, Java, Go, Python, Node.js, Ruby, C#, PHP, Swift, Dart, Kotlin, and Objective-C. Notable examples include the grpc-java plugin for generating Java stubs and base classes, and the grpc-go plugin (via protoc-gen-go-grpc) for producing Go interfaces and clients. Each plugin integrates seamlessly with protoc to output idiomatic code for its respective ecosystem, supporting both synchronous and asynchronous RPC patterns.
Customization during code generation is supported through plugin-specific options and parameters passed to protoc, allowing developers to tailor outputs for specific needs such as enabling service reflection for dynamic client introspection or generating custom wrappers for additional functionality. In languages like Go, parameters can direct the generation of separate files for protobuf messages and gRPC services, while Java plugins offer choices for stub types (e.g., blocking or asynchronous). These options enhance flexibility without altering the core gRPC runtime.

Client and Server Libraries

gRPC provides official client and server libraries for a variety of programming languages, enabling developers to implement RPC services using generated code from Protocol Buffer definitions. Officially supported languages for both clients and servers include C++, Dart, Go, Java (including Kotlin for JVM), Node.js, Python, Ruby, Swift, and .NET (C#). PHP and Objective-C are officially supported for clients only. These libraries, such as gRPC-Java for Java Virtual Machine environments and gRPC-Python for Python applications, share a common core based on HTTP/2 and Protocol Buffers while offering language-idiomatic APIs for building clients and servers.
On the client side, these libraries manage connections through channels, which abstract the underlying transport to a specified host and port, support configuration options like message compression, and maintain states such as connected or idle to handle connectivity. Clients can incorporate interceptors when constructing channels to apply cross-cutting behaviors, such as logging RPC metadata or implementing automatic retries for transient failures. Additionally, gRPC supports client-side load balancing, allowing clients to distribute requests across multiple backend servers using built-in policies like round-robin or custom implementations integrated with name resolution and service discovery. These features assume integration with stubs generated from service definitions, providing a seamless way to invoke remote methods synchronously or asynchronously.
Server libraries in gRPC handle concurrency via language-specific threading or asynchronous models; for example, the C++ core library relies on application-managed threads and completion queues for polling events without spawning threads internally. Servers can implement health checking by exposing the grpc.health.v1.Health service, which reports serving status (e.g., SERVING or NOT_SERVING) to enable clients to detect and avoid unhealthy instances. The reflection service, when enabled on a server, allows dynamic discovery of service methods, message types, and descriptors at runtime, facilitating tools for introspection and invocation without prior code generation.
For cross-platform compatibility, gRPC-Web extends the framework to browser-based clients by proxying gRPC calls over HTTP/1.1 (with trailers for responses) or HTTP/2, supporting unary and server-streaming RPCs while integrating with JavaScript environments like Node.js for full-stack development.

Testing

Unit Testing

Unit testing in gRPC focuses on verifying the behavior of individual components, such as client-side logic or service implementations, in isolation from network interactions or external dependencies. This approach ensures fast, repeatable tests by simulating gRPC calls through mocks, allowing developers to validate business logic, error handling, and message processing without incurring the overhead of real RPCs.
Mocking is a core strategy for gRPC unit tests, enabling the creation of in-memory stubs or fake channels that replicate the gRPC interface without actual network communication. For instance, in C++, developers use GoogleMock to generate mocked stubs from the protocol buffer definitions, setting expectations for method calls and predefined responses to test client logic. In Python, the official grpc_testing module provides test doubles like TestChannel and Server for simulating RPC invocations, while unittest.mock can patch channel creation for broader dependency isolation. Similarly, Java leverages Mockito to mock generated service stubs, configuring them to return specific responses or throw exceptions, and Go employs the gomock library to generate mocks for client interfaces, facilitating lightweight tests of service interactions. These language-specific tools allow precise control over mock behavior, such as verifying call arguments or sequencing multiple interactions in streaming scenarios, ensuring the service logic operates correctly under simulated conditions.
Testing gRPC messages involves using the auto-generated protocol buffer classes to create, serialize, and deserialize payloads, confirming that data transformations preserve integrity. Developers can instantiate message objects, populate fields, and use methods like SerializeToString() in Python or equivalent builders in other languages to validate round-trip serialization, catching issues like schema mismatches early. This is particularly useful for ensuring that custom validators or transformers in the application code handle protobufs as expected, without relying on full RPC flows.
To cover edge cases, unit tests configure mocks to simulate failures, such as returning gRPC status codes like INVALID_ARGUMENT for malformed inputs or UNAVAILABLE for connectivity issues, allowing verification of error propagation and recovery logic. For example, in Java with Mockito, a test might assert that an invalid request triggers a specific exception handling path, while in Go, gomock expectations can enforce that the mock returns a failed status after processing invalid data. These tests emphasize deterministic outcomes, contrasting with integration tests that involve real channel connections.

Integration Testing

Integration testing for gRPC services evaluates the end-to-end interactions between clients and servers, encompassing network transport via HTTP/2, protocol buffer serialization, authentication, and inter-service dependencies to validate system-level behavior in realistic setups. This approach contrasts with unit testing by incorporating actual or simulated dependencies rather than isolating components with mocks.
One efficient method for conducting integration tests is to employ in-process servers, which execute the gRPC server within the same process as the test client, leveraging the InProcess transport to eliminate network latency while fully exercising the RPC pipeline, including request dispatching and response handling. In Java implementations, for instance, the gRPC library supplies InProcessServerBuilder to construct such servers and InProcessChannelBuilder for clients, enabling rapid iteration on service logic and protocol compliance without overhead from separate processes. Similarly, .NET gRPC libraries support in-process channels through GrpcChannel.ForAddress with a custom transport factory, ideal for verifying unary and streaming calls in a controlled environment.
Ad-hoc integration testing benefits from specialized tools that facilitate direct interaction with running gRPC servers. gRPCurl serves as a command-line utility akin to curl, allowing invocation of RPC methods, inspection of service metadata, and testing of payloads over HTTP/2 without custom code. grpcui provides an interactive web-based interface for discovering services from proto files, executing calls with support for headers and streaming, and visualizing responses to debug integration issues. Additionally, as of 2025, tools like Postman offer native support for gRPC testing through their GUI. For mocking dependent services in multi-component tests, Docker containers enable isolated deployment of stub servers or databases, with orchestration tools like Docker Compose simulating networked topologies.
Key testing scenarios in gRPC integration emphasize protocol fidelity and resilience. Streaming correctness is assessed by initiating client-streaming, server-streaming, or bidirectional RPCs and confirming sequential data delivery, backpressure handling, and clean stream closure per the gRPC specification. Error propagation tests involve triggering server-side exceptions or invalid inputs to ensure proper transmission of gRPC status codes (e.g., UNAVAILABLE or INVALID_ARGUMENT) and details to clients, validating fault tolerance across the wire. Load simulation scenarios use benchmarking tools like ghz to generate concurrent unary or streaming requests, measuring throughput, latency, and error rates under varying concurrency to identify bottlenecks in HTTP/2 multiplexing.
In CI/CD workflows, gRPC integration tests are automated using real HTTP/2 endpoints, often by spinning up services via Docker in pipeline stages to mimic production networking and verify compatibility with load balancers or proxies. Frameworks like Testcontainers integrate Docker management directly into test runners, programmatically starting gRPC-enabled containers for dependency injection and ensuring reproducible, environment-agnostic validation before deployment.

Adoption and Use Cases

Major Companies and Projects

Google pioneered the development of gRPC as the open-source evolution of its internal Stubby RPC framework, which has connected microservices across data centers since before its public release in 2015. Internally, Google continues to rely on gRPC to power high-scale services, including the Google Ads API for programmatic advertising management and backend communications in YouTube for content delivery and recommendations.
Several major companies have adopted gRPC to enhance their distributed systems. Netflix extensively uses gRPC for backend-to-backend communication within its microservices architecture, leveraging its efficiency for high-throughput data exchanges in content recommendation and streaming pipelines. Uber employs gRPC in its next-generation push platform to support real-time features, such as bi-directional streaming for live ETA updates, driver location tracking, and dynamic pricing notifications. Cisco integrates gRPC into its networking infrastructure for model-driven APIs, enabling high-performance telemetry, configuration management, and operational state retrieval in platforms like IOS XR and Mobility Services. Square utilizes gRPC across its microservices ecosystem to facilitate secure, low-latency interactions in payment processing and financial services.
Prominent open-source projects also incorporate gRPC as a core technology. Kubernetes leverages gRPC in its Container Runtime Interface (CRI) for efficient communication between the API server and container runtimes, supporting scalable orchestration of containerized workloads. The Envoy proxy provides built-in gRPC support, acting as a high-performance intermediary for routing, load balancing, and observability in HTTP/2-based environments. Istio, a popular service mesh, uses gRPC for traffic management policies, including support for proxyless gRPC services that integrate directly with the control plane via xDS APIs.
As of 2025, gRPC has seen widespread adoption, with 579 verified companies across industries implementing it for production systems, reflecting its role in modern cloud-native architectures.

Real-World Applications

gRPC is widely employed in microservices architectures for efficient inter-service communication in cloud-native applications, such as e-commerce platforms where services handle order processing, inventory management, and payment verification. In these setups, gRPC's support for bidirectional streaming enables real-time coordination between services, for instance, streaming order updates from a fulfillment service to a notification service during peak shopping events.
For mobile and IoT applications, gRPC provides compact binary serialization via Protocol Buffers, reducing payload sizes and bandwidth usage, which is critical for Android and iOS apps on limited networks or edge devices in IoT ecosystems. On iOS, developers leverage gRPC's Objective-C and Swift libraries to build responsive clients that interact with backend services, such as fetching real-time data for navigation apps with minimal latency. In IoT scenarios, like distributed robotics, gRPC facilitates structured RPCs between low-power devices and central coordinators, optimizing communication over constrained connections as seen in platforms combining it with WebRTC for peer-to-peer data exchange.
In AI and machine learning workflows, gRPC powers model serving through TensorFlow Serving, where it enables high-performance inference requests, such as batched predictions, in applications like image classification pipelines. This integration supports scalable deployment of ML models, allowing clients to send batched inputs for real-time processing, such as in recommendation systems handling large-scale user queries.
gRPC addresses challenges in high-throughput data pipelines, particularly in observability tools for log aggregation, by leveraging its efficient HTTP/2 multiplexing to handle voluminous telemetry data without bottlenecks. For example, OpenTelemetry's OTLP protocol uses gRPC to export logs, metrics, and traces from distributed systems, ensuring reliable ingestion at scale in production environments.

History and Evolution

Origins at Google

gRPC originated within Google as an evolution of its internal remote procedure call (RPC) infrastructure, primarily Stubby, which had been in use since the early 2000s to interconnect the company's vast network of microservices across data centers. Stubby served as a foundational general-purpose RPC system, enabling efficient communication in Google's large-scale distributed environment, but it was deeply integrated with proprietary protocols and tools, limiting its external applicability. In the early 2010s, as Google sought to modernize this infrastructure for broader interoperability, development of gRPC began, building on Stubby's core principles while incorporating emerging open standards.
The primary motivations for gRPC's creation stemmed from the need for a high-performance, multiplexed RPC mechanism capable of handling the demands of Google's expansive distributed systems, where services required low-latency, reliable intercommunication at massive scale. Traditional RPC approaches often struggled with overhead in such environments, prompting Google to design gRPC for efficiency, including support for streaming, bidirectional communication, and payload-agnostic serialization to accommodate diverse use cases beyond just internal services. This focus addressed key challenges like resource utilization in data centers and the fallacies of distributed computing, ensuring robustness for fleet-wide deployments.
Key milestones in gRPC's internal development included its alignment with the HTTP/2 standard, finalized in 2015, which provided multiplexing, header compression, and server push features essential for optimizing RPC over the web. By integrating HTTP/2, gRPC achieved significant performance gains, such as reduced latency and higher throughput, making it suitable for Google's infrastructure. Internally, gRPCbuilding on Stubbypowered tens of billions of requests per second, demonstrating its capacity to support billions of daily calls across Google's services.
The initial development of gRPC was led by engineers from Google's infrastructure and networking groups, who leveraged expertise from maintaining Stubby to create a framework that balanced performance with extensibility.

Open Sourcing and Versions

gRPC was open-sourced by Google in February 2015 under the Apache 2.0 license, with the initial repository hosted on GitHub to facilitate community contributions and adoption.
The project marked its first stable release, version 1.0, in August 2016, establishing a foundation for production use across multiple languages and emphasizing reliability and performance over HTTP/2. Subsequent releases, such as version 1.20 in April 2019, introduced enhancements to HTTP/2 support, including improved streaming capabilities and integration with gRPC-Web, which enables browser-based clients to interact with gRPC services via a proxy. gRPC-Web itself reached general availability in October 2018, expanding accessibility for web applications.
By November 2025, the latest stable release is version 1.76.0.
gRPC joined the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) as an incubating project in February 2017, reflecting its growing role in cloud-native ecosystems. As of 2025, it remains in incubation but continues to mature, with ongoing efforts toward graduation, supported by a vibrant community of over 17,500 contributing organizations.
The project's versioning policy prioritizes backward compatibility for stable APIs, allowing minor releases to introduce breaking changes only for features explicitly marked as experimental at introduction, ensuring minimal disruption for existing deployments.

Alternatives

REST and HTTP APIs

REST (Representational State Transfer) is an architectural style for designing distributed hypermedia systems, focusing on resources as the central elements of the API. In RESTful APIs, resources are identified by unique URIs, and interactions occur through standard HTTP methods such as GET for retrieval, POST for creation, PUT for updates, and DELETE for removal, adhering to principles like statelessness and uniform interfaces. Typically implemented over HTTP/1.1, REST APIs exchange data in human-readable formats like JSON, which facilitates debugging and integration with web browsers and tools.
gRPC differs fundamentally from REST in its design philosophy and mechanics. While REST often follows a document-first approachwhere API contracts are described post-implementation using specifications like OpenAPIgRPC adopts a contract-first methodology, defining services and messages via an Interface Definition Language (IDL) like Protocol Buffers before generating client and server code. This ensures strong typing and version compatibility across languages. Serialization in gRPC uses compact binary Protocol Buffers, reducing payload size and parsing overhead compared to REST's text-based JSON, which can be verbose and slower to process. Furthermore, gRPC builds on HTTP/2 to support advanced features like bidirectional streaming and flow control, enabling efficient real-time communication without the polling mechanisms commonly needed in REST for updates. These attributes make gRPC more performant for high-throughput, internal service-to-service interactions in microservices architectures.
REST remains the choice for scenarios prioritizing simplicity, browser compatibility, and human-readability, such as public-facing web APIs where developers benefit from familiar HTTP semantics and easy inspection of payloads. In contrast, gRPC is ideal for polyglot environments requiring efficiency, low latency, and native support for streaming, particularly in backend systems across diverse programming languages. To accommodate hybrid needs, where legacy REST clients must interface with gRPC backends, the gRPC-Gateway tool generates a reverse-proxy server that maps RESTful JSON HTTP requests to equivalent gRPC calls, preserving the benefits of both paradigms without duplicating service logic.

Other RPC Frameworks

Apache Thrift, originally developed by Facebook and now maintained by the Apache Software Foundation, is a binary protocol for cross-language service development that supports multiple transport layers such as TCP and HTTP. Unlike gRPC, which leverages HTTP/2 for multiplexing and bidirectional streaming, Thrift lacks native support for streaming RPCs, requiring custom implementations for such features. Thrift's interface definition language (IDL) generates client and server code in various languages, but it does not emphasize HTTP/2 integration, making it more flexible for non-web transports yet less optimized for modern cloud environments.
Apache Avro, part of the Apache Hadoop ecosystem, provides schema-based data serialization designed for big data processing and schema evolution in distributed systems. Avro employs dynamic typing through JSON schemas that allow for flexible data interchange without requiring recompilation for minor changes, contrasting with gRPC's static typing enforced by Protocol Buffers. While Avro excels in compact binary encoding for storage and batch processing in tools like Kafka, it is primarily a serialization format rather than a full RPC framework, often paired with other protocols for remote calls, unlike gRPC's integrated RPC capabilities.
JSON-RPC is a lightweight, stateless protocol that enables remote procedure calls using JSON over transports like HTTP, focusing on simplicity without an enforced IDL. It serializes requests and responses as JSON objects, supporting both positional and named parameters, but lacks the performance optimizations of binary formats, resulting in larger payloads and higher latency compared to gRPC. Without built-in schema enforcement or streaming support, JSON-RPC prioritizes ease of implementation for simple APIs but falls short in enforcing contracts or handling high-throughput scenarios.
Cap'n Proto RPC offers zero-copy serialization for efficient in-memory data access, eliminating the encoding/decoding overhead present in traditional RPCs like gRPC. Developed by Kenton Varda, it uses a schema-driven format similar to Protocol Buffers but supports direct structural access without parsing, enabling faster performance in benchmarks for large data transfers. While Cap'n Proto includes RPC features like promise pipelining for asynchronous calls, its language support is narrower than gRPC's, and it focuses more on inter-process communication via shared memory rather than network-centric HTTP/2 transport.
TARS, an open-source RPC framework from Tencent, employs an IDL akin to Thrift for defining services and generates code in languages including C++, Java, and Node.js. It supports binary protocols over TCP or UDP with built-in service discovery and load balancing, but offers less comprehensive ecosystem integration compared to gRPC, particularly in HTTP/2 and multi-language streaming support. TARS emphasizes high availability in large-scale deployments, yet gRPC's broader adoption stems from its standardized tooling and compatibility with cloud-native tools.
In cloud-native environments, gRPC has gained prominence due to its alignment with the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF), where it is an incubating project facilitating integration with Kubernetes and service meshes. According to the 2024 CNCF Annual Survey, 3% of respondents use gRPC in production, reflecting its lead in microservices architectures over alternatives lacking similar ecosystem momentum. This trend underscores gRPC's advantages in performance and interoperability for distributed systems.

References

gRPC

Introduction to gRPC

About gRPC

Introducing gRPC, a new open source HTTP/2 RPC Framework

Core concepts, architecture and lifecycle - gRPC

The state of gRPC in the browser

Basics tutorial | Go - gRPC

Overview | Protocol Buffers Documentation

Encoding | Protocol Buffers Documentation

Language Guide (proto 3) | Protocol Buffers Documentation

 Performance Comparison of Messaging Protocols and Serialization ...

grpc/doc/PROTOCOL-HTTP2.md at master grpc/grpc

gRPC on HTTP/2 Engineering a Robust, High-performance Protocol

Basics tutorial | Web - gRPC

Language Guide (proto 3) | Protocol Buffers Documentation

Basics tutorial | Python - gRPC

Performance Best Practices - gRPC

GRPC Core: gRPC over HTTP2

Flow Control - gRPC

https://httpwg.org/specs/rfc7540.html#section-9.2

Authentication - gRPC

credentials package - google.golang.org/grpc/credentials

Authentication and authorization in gRPC for ASP.NET Core

Interceptors - gRPC

Encoding | Protocol Buffers Documentation

Performance best practices with gRPC - Microsoft Learn

Compression | gRPC

GRPC Core: gRPC Compression

Status Codes | gRPC

Error handling | gRPC

GRPC Core: gRPC over HTTP2

Deadlines - gRPC

Cancellation | gRPC

Basics tutorial | C++ - gRPC

Basics tutorial | Java - gRPC

Supported languages - gRPC

The Java gRPC implementation. HTTP/2 based RPC - GitHub

Generated-code reference | Go - gRPC

Generated-code reference | Java - gRPC

Reflection | gRPC

gRPC Load Balancing

GRPC Core: <tt>epoll</tt>-based pollset implementation in gRPC

Health Checking - gRPC

Web | gRPC

How to write unit tests for gRPC C client.

gRPC Testing gRPC Python 1.76.0 documentation - grpc.github.io

Implement Unit Test in gRPC Service | Baeldung

Test gRPC services in ASP.NET Core - Microsoft Learn

API Call Structure | Google Ads API - Google for Developers

Practical API Design at Netflix, Part 1: Using Protobuf FieldMask

Uber's Next Gen Push Platform on gRPC | Uber Blog

Use gRPC Protocol to Define Network Operations with Data Models ...

gRPC APIs Reference - Mobility Services - Cisco DevNet

gRPC cross-platform open source RPC over HTTP/2

gRPC in the real world: The Kubernetes Container Runtime Interface

gRPC envoy 1.37.0-dev-e25196 documentation

gRPC Proxyless Service Mesh - Istio

Companies using gRPC in 2025 - GTM Intelligence - Landbase

GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo - GitHub

gRPC in action - Example using Java microservices | CNCF

Build client-server applications with gRPC | Connectivity

Swift | gRPC

How robots talk: building distributed robots with gRPC and WebRTC

Serving a TensorFlow Model | TFX

Reduce computer vision inference latency using gRPC with ...

Netflix | CNCF

gRPC Motivation and Design Principles

gRPC: a true internet-scale RPC framework is now 1.0 and ready for ...

Google Releases gRPC, a HTTP/2 RPC Framework for Microservices

Grpc 1.20.0 - NuGet

gRPC-Web is Generally Available

FAQ - gRPC

gRPC | CNCF

gRPC Governance Changes and the Path To CNCF Graduation

GRPC Core: gRPC Versioning Guide

gRPC vs REST: Understanding gRPC, OpenAPI and ... - Google Cloud

gRPC vs REST - Difference Between Application Designs - AWS

gRPC vs. REST - Postman Blog

grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway: gRPC to JSON proxy generator ...

Moving From Apache Thrift to gRPC A Perspective From Alluxio

Apache Thrift - Documentation

404 Not Found

Data serialization tools comparison: Avro vs Protobuf - SoftwareMill

JSON-RPC 2.0 Specification

Cap'n Proto: Introduction

gRPC vs Tars | What are the differences? - StackShare

 Cloud Native 2024

CNCF Survey: Use of cloud native technologies in production has ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion