HMAC Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
HMAC
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 HMAC (Hash-based Message Authentication Code) is a cryptographic mechanism for verifying the integrity and authenticity of a message, utilizing a secret shared key in conjunction with a cryptographic hash function to produce a fixed-length tag that accompanies the message. It ensures that any alteration to the message during transmission would result in a mismatched tag, thereby detecting tampering or forgery by unauthorized parties. Developed as a secure and efficient alternative to earlier keyed hash constructions, HMAC is widely adopted in protocols such as TLS, IPsec, and SSH for protecting data in transit.
The construction of HMAC involves nesting two applications of the underlying hash function, with the key XORed against fixed padding constants to create inner and outer hashes. Specifically, for a hash function H with block size B, HMAC(K, m) = H((K* opad) H((K* ipad) m)), where K* is the key padded or hashed to B bytes if necessary, opad is the byte 0x5C repeated B times, and ipad is the byte 0x36 repeated B times. This design leverages the compression function of the hash in a way that provides provable security under standard assumptions about the hash function's properties, such as pseudorandomness or collision resistance.
HMAC was first proposed in 1996 by Mihir Bellare, Ran Canetti, and Hugo Krawczyk in their paper "Keying Hash Functions for Message Authentication," which introduced both NMAC (a nested MAC) and HMAC as practical, efficient schemes compatible with existing hash functions like MD5 and SHA-1 without requiring modifications. The mechanism was standardized in RFC 2104 in February 1997 by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), specifying its use with iterative hash functions for internet protocols. Subsequently, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) formalized HMAC in Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 198 in 2002, emphasizing its dependence on the underlying hash function's strength and recommending secure hashes like SHA-256 for contemporary applications.
Security analyses have confirmed HMAC's robustness; for instance, its pseudorandom function (PRF) properties hold as long as the hash's compression function behaves as a PRF, even without full collision resistance, making it resilient against known attacks on specific hashes when paired with secure ones. Today, HMAC remains a cornerstone of cryptographic practice, integral to standards like OAuth for API authentication and used in various cryptographic protocols including those based on CMS (Cryptographic Message Syntax) for message authentication, with ongoing recommendations to migrate to longer-output variants like HMAC-SHA-512 amid breaks in legacy hash functions such as SHA-1.

Introduction

Overview

HMAC, or Hash-based Message Authentication Code, is a cryptographic construction that combines a cryptographic hash function with a secret key to generate a message authentication code (MAC). This mechanism produces a fixed-size output, known as a tag, which serves as a digital signature for the message, allowing the recipient to verify its authenticity and integrity. By incorporating the secret key, HMAC ensures that only parties possessing the key can generate valid tags, thereby preventing unauthorized alterations or forgeries.
The primary purpose of HMAC is to provide both data integrityconfirming that the message has not been tampered withand authenticityensuring it originated from a legitimate sourcethrough the use of a shared secret key between sender and receiver. This makes HMAC particularly useful in secure communication protocols, such as those in TLS/SSL, IPsec, and various API authentications, where verifying the genuineness of transmitted data is essential. Unlike unkeyed hash functions like MD5 or SHA-256, which only provide integrity checks without authentication, HMAC leverages these existing hash primitives to add key-based security without requiring entirely new algorithms.
In contrast to other MAC constructions like CMAC, which often rely on block ciphers, HMAC's design capitalizes on the widespread availability and efficiency of hash functions, making it versatile and computationally lightweight for software implementations. It was first standardized by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) in RFC 2104 in 1997, with an update in RFC 6234 in 2011 to include additional hash functions and clarifications. This standardization has cemented HMAC's role as a foundational tool in modern cryptography, adopted in numerous standards and libraries worldwide.

Historical Development

HMAC was invented in 1996 by cryptographers Mihir Bellare, Ran Canetti, and Hugo Krawczyk to address vulnerabilities in earlier ad hoc methods for keying cryptographic hash functions for message authentication. These prior constructions, such as those proposed for MD5 in Internet drafts, lacked rigorous security proofs and were susceptible to attacks like birthday paradoxes or length-extension exploits when keys were simply prepended or appended to messages. The designers aimed to create a practical, efficient scheme that treated the hash function as a black box, providing provable security under standard assumptions about the hash's compression function while minimizing performance overhead compared to block ciphers.
The core ideas were first detailed in the seminal 1996 paper "Keying Hash Functions for Message Authentication," presented at CRYPTO '96, which introduced the nested MAC (NMAC) construction and its practical instantiation, HMAC, compatible with popular hashes like MD5 and SHA-1. This was followed by a more accessible exposition in the Spring 1996 issue of RSA Laboratories' CryptoBytes. Formal standardization came swiftly with IETF RFC 2104 in February 1997, which specified HMAC's algorithm and recommended its use over insecure variants, establishing it as a key mechanism for protocols requiring message integrity.
Subsequent updates refined HMAC's implementation for evolving hash functions. In 2002, NIST published FIPS 198, formalizing HMAC as a federal standard for keyed-hash message authentication. In May 2011, RFC 6234 provided detailed guidance and reference code for applying HMAC with the SHA-2 family (SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512), addressing the need for stronger primitives amid growing concerns over SHA-1's security. Similarly, NIST's Special Publication 800-107 (Revision 1, August 2012) incorporated HMAC into federal guidelines for approved hash-based applications, emphasizing its role in achieving desired security strengths for digital signatures and key derivation.
HMAC saw rapid adoption in core Internet security protocols starting in the late 1990s. It was integrated into TLS 1.0 via RFC 2246 (January 1999) for authenticating handshake messages and records using HMAC-MD5 or HMAC-SHA-1. In IPsec, RFC 2404 (November 1998) defined HMAC-SHA-1-96 for authentication in ESP and AH, enabling widespread deployment in VPNs and secure communications by the early 2000s. As cryptographic standards evolved, MD5-based HMAC faced deprecation in modern contexts; for instance, FIPS 140-3 (published March 2019, with validations accelerating post-2022) restricts MD5 to legacy modes only, prohibiting its use in new approved implementations to mitigate collision vulnerabilities. As of June 2025, NIST proposed withdrawing FIPS 198-1, with HMAC guidance moving to draft SP 800-224 (June 2024).

Background Concepts

Cryptographic Hash Functions

A cryptographic hash function is a mathematical algorithm that maps data of an arbitrary size to a fixed-size value, typically represented as a hexadecimal number, known as the hash value or digest. This mapping is deterministic, meaning that the same input always produces the same output, and it is designed to be one-way, ensuring that it is computationally infeasible to reverse the process and recover the original input from the hash. The output length is fixed regardless of input size, which enables efficient storage and comparison for applications like data verification.
The core security properties of a cryptographic hash function include preimage resistance, second preimage resistance, and collision resistance. Preimage resistance ensures that, given a hash value, it is computationally infeasible to find any input that produces that exact output. Second preimage resistance guarantees that, for a given input and its corresponding hash, it is infeasible to find a different input that yields the same hash value. Collision resistance provides the strongest protection by making it computationally infeasible to discover any two distinct inputs that produce the same hash output. These properties collectively prevent attacks that could undermine the function's reliability in security contexts.
Additional key characteristics enhance the robustness of cryptographic hash functions. The avalanche effect describes how a minimal change in the input, such as flipping a single bit, results in a dramatically different output, typically altering about half of the bits in the hash to ensure diffusion of changes. Many widely used hash functions, including those in the SHA family, employ the Merkle-Damgrd construction, which processes input data through padding to a multiple of the block size followed by iterative compression using a one-way compression function. This structure allows handling of variable-length messages while preserving security properties derived from the underlying compression function.
Common examples illustrate the evolution and current status of these functions. MD5, producing a 128-bit output, was once popular but is now considered insecure for new applications due to practical collision attacks demonstrated in 2004. SHA-1, with a 160-bit output, has been deprecated by NIST since 2011 for most uses, including digital signatures, following theoretical and practical weaknesses in its collision resistance. In contrast, SHA-256, generating a 256-bit output, remains widely adopted and secure for contemporary applications, providing a security level of 128 bits against collisions.
While cryptographic hash functions excel at ensuring data integrity by detecting unauthorized modifications, they do not inherently provide authentication, as anyone can compute the hash without verifying the message's origin; keying mechanisms are required to address this limitation.

Message Authentication Codes

A message authentication code (MAC) is a family of cryptographic functions parameterized by a symmetric secret key, which takes a message as input and produces a fixed-length authentication tag (or simply "tag") that verifies the message's integrity and the sender's authenticity when recomputed by a party possessing the same key. This tag ensures that the message has not been altered in transit and originates from a legitimate source, providing data origin authentication without relying on public-key infrastructure. MACs are essential in protocols requiring symmetric-key confidentiality and integrity, such as secure communication channels.
The security of a MAC is defined by its resistance to existential forgery under chosen-message attacks (EUF-CMA), where an adversary, given access to tags for messages of its choice, cannot produce a valid tag for a new message with non-negligible probability. This property makes it computationally infeasible to forge a tag without knowledge of the key, even after observing multiple valid message-tag pairs. A secure MAC must also resist other attacks, such as key recovery or universal forgery, ensuring overall robustness in adversarial settings.
MACs can be constructed using either block ciphers or cryptographic hash functions, each with distinct trade-offs in performance, security assumptions, and implementation complexity. Block-cipher-based MACs, such as CBC-MAC and PMAC, encrypt the message in a chained mode to generate the tag, offering provable security under standard assumptions for the underlying cipher like AES, but requiring a block cipher primitive and potentially higher computational overhead for long messages. In contrast, hash-based MACs like HMAC nest a keyed hash function to produce the tag, leveraging widely available and mature hash designs (e.g., SHA-256) without needing a separate block cipher, which simplifies deployment in resource-constrained environments and often yields better performance for variable-length messages. However, the security of hash-based MACs depends heavily on the hash function's properties, whereas block-cipher-based ones inherit security from the cipher's pseudorandomness.
Naive approaches to keying hash functions for MACs, such as simple concatenation like hash(key || message) or hash(message || key), are insecure due to vulnerabilities like length-extension attacks, where an adversary can append arbitrary data to a known message and compute a valid tag without the key by exploiting the hash's internal state. These prefix- or suffix-keyed constructions fail to provide EUF-CMA security because they allow attackers to forge tags for extended messages using only the original tag and message length, motivating more sophisticated designs like HMAC that inner and outer pad the key to mitigate such flaws.

Construction and Computation

Formal Definition

The Hash-based Message Authentication Code (HMAC) is formally defined as
HMAC(K,m)=H((Kopad)H((Kipad)m)),
\text{HMAC}(K, m) = H\left( (K \oplus \text{opad}) \parallel H\left( (K \oplus \text{ipad}) \parallel m \right) \right),
HMAC(K,m)=H((Kopad)H((Kipad)m)),
where HHH denotes the underlying cryptographic hash function, KKK is the secret key, mmm is the message to be authenticated, \oplus represents bitwise XOR, \parallel denotes concatenation, ipad\text{ipad}ipad is the inner padding consisting of the byte 0x360x360x36 repeated BBB times, and opad\text{opad}opad is the outer padding consisting of the byte 0x5C0x5C0x5C repeated BBB times, with BBB being the block size of HHH.
The key KKK is processed to fit the block size BBB: if its length is less than BBB, it is padded on the right with zeros to reach length BBB; if longer than BBB, it is first hashed using HHH to produce a BBB-byte intermediate key, which is then used in place of KKK. This key derivation ensures compatibility with the hash function's input requirements while maintaining security properties.
The output of HMAC is a fixed-length authentication tag of the same size as the digest produced by HHH, providing a compact verification value; for instance, HMAC-SHA256 yields a 256-bit (32-byte) tag. The block size BBB varies by hash function: it is 64 bytes (512 bits) for SHA-1 and SHA-256, and 128 bytes (1024 bits) for SHA-384 and SHA-512.

Step-by-Step Algorithm

The computation of HMAC begins with preprocessing the secret key KKK to ensure it matches the block size BBB of the underlying hash function HHH. If the length of KKK is exactly BBB bytes, it is used directly as the derived key K0K_0K0. If shorter than BBB, KKK is padded on the right with zeros to reach BBB bytes, forming K0K_0K0. If longer than BBB, HHH is first applied to KKK to produce an LLL-byte hash output (where LLL is the digest length of HHH), which is then padded on the right with zeros to BBB bytes, yielding K0K_0K0.
Next, the inner hash is computed as follows: Form the inner padded key by XORing each byte of K0K_0K0 with the inner padding value ipad (the byte 0x360x360x36 repeated BBB times), denoted as sipad=K0ipads_{\text{ipad}} = K_0 \oplus \text{ipad}sipad=K0ipad. Append the message mmm to sipads_{\text{ipad}}sipad, resulting in the input block sipadms_{\text{ipad}} \parallel msipadm. The hash function HHH is then applied to this input, incorporating the standard padding rules of HHH (such as length-appended bit padding in MD5 or SHA-family algorithms) to process the concatenated data into complete blocks before finalizing the digest. This produces the intermediate result s1=H((K0ipad)m)s_1 = H((K_0 \oplus \text{ipad}) \parallel m)s1=H((K0ipad)m), which is an LLL-byte value.
The outer hash follows similarly: XOR each byte of K0K_0K0 with the outer padding value opad (the byte 0x5C0x5C0x5C repeated BBB times), forming sopad=K0opads_{\text{opad}} = K_0 \oplus \text{opad}sopad=K0opad. Append the s1s_1s1 from the inner hash to sopads_{\text{opad}}sopad, creating the outer input sopads1s_{\text{opad}} \parallel s_1sopads1. Apply HHH to this input, again using the hash function's standard padding (e.g., appending the bit length of the input to ensure secure processing of any non-block-aligned data). The resulting LLL-byte digest is the HMAC output: H((K0opad)s1)H((K_0 \oplus \text{opad}) \parallel s_1)H((K0opad)s1). All operations are performed at the byte level, with XOR applied bitwise to corresponding bytes.
Optionally, the HMAC output may be truncated to a shorter length ttt bits (where t<L8t < L \times 8t<L8) by taking the leftmost ttt bits, such as for HMAC-SHA-256 truncated to 128 bits, to improve efficiency in bandwidth-constrained environments; however, this reduces the security margin and requires ttt to be sufficiently large to maintain resistance to attacks, as detailed in subsequent security analyses.

Design Principles

Rationale for Structure

The structure of HMAC, which employs nested applications of a cryptographic hash function H with the secret key K, was designed to address key vulnerabilities inherent in simpler message authentication code (MAC) constructions, such as directly hashing the key concatenated with the message H(K m). In particular, this nested approachcomputing H(K opad, H(K ipad, m)) where opad and ipad are fixed padding constantsavoids length-extension attacks that plague prepend-only key placements, as an attacker cannot exploit the hash function's padding mechanism to forge valid MACs for extended messages without knowledge of K. By applying the hash twice, the inner computation deeply integrates the key into the message's compression process, while the outer hash adds an additional layer of protection, ensuring security even when H follows the Merkle-Damgrd construction common in hash functions like MD5 and SHA-1.
The use of fixed inner (ipad) and outer (opad) paddings, selected for their differing hexadecimal values (0x36 and 0x5C, respectively), creates two distinct key schedules that promote diffusion across the hash computations without depending on the randomness or entropy of the key itself. This choice ensures that the effective keys for the inner and outer hashes differ substantially in their bit patterns, enhancing the overall mixing properties and resistance to certain analytical attacks.
A primary motivation for HMAC's design was compatibility with existing hash function implementations, allowing it to leverage mature, optimized code for functions like MD5 or SHA without requiring internal modifications to their algorithms. This reuse preserves the performance characteristics of the underlying hash while enabling straightforward adoption in cryptographic protocols and software, as the construction treats H as a black-box primitive.

Parameter Selection

The selection of parameters in HMAC is critical to ensuring its security as a message authentication code, primarily involving the choice of an underlying cryptographic hash function and the secret key. The hash function should be secure, with strong collision resistance to minimize forgery risks, as approved by NIST for use in HMAC constructions. Deprecated functions like MD5, which suffered practical collisions in 2004, and SHA-1, broken by a full collision attack in 2017, must be avoided due to their vulnerability to forgery risks in HMAC. Recommended options include SHA-256 or stronger variants from the SHA-2 family (e.g., SHA-384, SHA-512), which offer at least 128 bits of security against collisions, or SHA-3 family functions (e.g., SHA3-256, SHA3-512) for enhanced resistance, particularly in anticipation of quantum threats where Grover's algorithm could halve classical security levels. Note that shorter outputs like SHA-224 may face deprecation after 2030 for new applications.
The secret key for HMAC should be generated randomly using a secure random number generator compliant with NIST standards, such as those in SP 800-90A, to ensure unpredictability. Its length must be at least the output size of the hash function (e.g., 256 bits for SHA-256) to match the security strength, though NIST specifies a minimum of 128 bits overall; keys longer than the hash block size are hashed down to fit, but using keys up to the block size is preferred for optimal resistance to key recovery. Key rotation practices are essential for long-term security, involving periodic replacement (e.g., annually or after a fixed number of authentications) to limit exposure if a key is compromised, while maintaining backward compatibility through dual-key verification during transitions.
The block size $ B $ of the hash function influences HMAC's efficiency and security margin; for instance, SHA-256 uses $ B = 512 $ bits, while SHA-512 employs $ B = 1024 $ bits, providing a larger inner padding space that enhances resistance to certain extension attacks but increases computational overhead. Larger block sizes are advisable for high-security applications despite the performance trade-off. When truncating the HMAC output for bandwidth constraints, NIST requires at least 32 bits, with fixed lengths per key lifecycle, but truncations under 64 bits necessitate a formal risk assessment to ensure sufficient forgery resistance (e.g., retaining at least half the full output length for 128-bit security).

Security Analysis

Theoretical Foundations

The security of HMAC as a message authentication code (MAC) is established in cryptographic models where the underlying hash function HHH serves as a pseudorandom function (PRF) or possesses weak collision resistance. Specifically, if HHH is weakly collision-resistantmeaning it is computationally infeasible for an adversary to find two distinct inputs with the same output under a fixed initialization vectorthen HMAC inherits this property to provide existential unforgeability against adaptive chosen-message attacks. This model ensures that an adversary, after querying the MAC oracle on up to qqq messages, cannot produce a valid tag for a new message with non-negligible probability.
A foundational proof by Bellare, Canetti, and Krawczyk in 1996 demonstrates that the existential unforgeability of HMAC reduces directly to the collision resistance of HHH. Under an adaptive chosen-message attack, the probability of successful forgery is at most approximately q22n\frac{q^2}{2^n}2nq2, where qqq is the number of oracle queries and nnn is the bit length of the hash output; this bound arises from the birthday paradox applied in the reduction, where breaking HMAC implies finding a collision in HHH keyed by a secret value. The proof employs a black-box reduction, treating the iterated hash function as an oracle without access to its internals, which simplifies practical verification. This analysis was formalized in the same work and later specified in RFC 2104, which standardizes HMAC and references the security guarantees.
Subsequent extensions refined these foundations by relaxing assumptions. In 2006, Bellare provided new proofs showing that HMAC is a secure PRF if the underlying compression function of HHH is a PRF, eliminating the need for collision resistance and extending security up to roughly 2n/22^{n/2}2n/2 queries before birthday attacks become feasible. Post-2010 analyses addressed multi-user scenarios, where multiple parties share the construction; Backendal et al. (2023) established tight multi-user security bounds for HMAC as a dual-PRF, confirming robustness even when messages can serve as keys in protocols like TLS 1.3. Additionally, despite practical breaks like collisions in MD5, HMAC-MD5 retains security for authentication purposes, as its guarantees rely on the weaker PRF property of the hash rather than full collision resistance, per updated considerations in RFC 6151.

Vulnerabilities and Mitigations

HMAC inherits certain weaknesses from the underlying hash function, but its keyed construction often mitigates collision-based attacks that affect the hash in isolation. For instance, despite the practical collision attack on SHA-1 demonstrated in the 2017 SHAttered attack, HMAC-SHA1 remains secure as a message authentication code because forging an HMAC requires knowledge of the secret key, and the collision does not extend to the keyed domain. Similarly, HMAC-MD5 is vulnerable to forgery only if the secret key is exposed or revealed post-authentication, as MD5's collision vulnerabilities do not directly compromise the MAC when the key remains confidential.
Side-channel attacks pose significant risks to HMAC implementations, particularly in hardware or software environments where physical or timing information can leak key material. Timing attacks can exploit variable execution times during hash computations or tag comparisons, allowing attackers to infer key bits through repeated measurements. Power analysis attacks, such as differential power analysis (DPA), target the intermediate computations in HMAC-SHA-2 by analyzing power consumption traces to recover the key after as few as a few thousand traces in the Hamming weight model. Mitigations include implementing constant-time algorithms to eliminate timing variations and using blinding techniques, where inputs are randomized with ephemeral values before processing and derandomized afterward. Hardware accelerations, such as Intel SHA Extensions, enable efficient constant-time SHA computations, reducing exposure in software implementations.
Key management flaws can undermine HMAC's security, especially with weak or predictable keys. Using an all-zero key or keys shorter than the hash function's block size results in zero-padding, which reduces effective entropy and makes brute-force attacks more feasible, as the padded key effectively lowers the security margin. In multi-user scenarios, where multiple parties share or derive keys from a common source, the forgery probability increases significantly; for example, HMAC with 80-bit keys provides only about 40 bits of security per user in such settings due to amplified collision risks across queries.
Recent advisories highlight HMAC's resilience to major breaks but emphasize preparations for quantum threats and long-term agility. Grover's algorithm reduces the effective key strength of symmetric primitives like HMAC by a factor of two, halving brute-force complexity from 2n2^n2n to 2n/22^{n/2}2n/2; thus, NIST and other bodies recommend at least 256-bit keys for HMAC to maintain 128-bit post-quantum security. No structural breaks have been found in HMAC, but protocols should incorporate hash agility the ability to swap underlying hash functions (e.g., from SHA-1 to SHA-3)to adapt to emerging weaknesses without redesign. NIST approves SHA-2 and SHA-3 families for HMAC use, prioritizing these over deprecated hashes like MD5 or SHA-1.

Practical Usage

Implementation Considerations

Implementing HMAC securely requires reliance on established cryptographic libraries to avoid the risks associated with custom implementations, which can introduce subtle vulnerabilities due to implementation errors. Recommended libraries include OpenSSL, which provides a robust HMAC interface compliant with RFC 2104 and supports various hash functions like SHA-256, and Bouncy Castle, a Java-based library offering HMAC implementations that adhere to the same standard for cross-platform use. NIST guidelines emphasize using approved implementations to ensure compliance with security requirements for hash-based applications. Developers should never attempt to roll their own HMAC code, as even minor deviations from the specification can compromise security.
In terms of performance, computing an HMAC typically incurs approximately twice the computational cost of a single hash operation, as it involves two invocations of the underlying hash function with key-derived padding. For large messages, this overhead is often negligible due to the efficiency of modern hash algorithms, but it can become significant in high-throughput scenarios. Optimizations such as incremental or streaming updates allow processing data in chunks without recomputing the entire message, enabling efficient handling of continuous data streams like network packets. Hardware acceleration further mitigates costs; for instance, Intel's SHA Extensions, introduced in 2013 and available in processors starting from Goldmont architecture, provide instructions that speed up SHA-1 and SHA-256 computations, thereby benefiting HMAC operations based on these hashes.
Best practices for HMAC implementation focus on mitigating side-channel and operational risks. Implementations must use constant-time operations for comparisons and computations to prevent timing attacks that could leak information about the key or message. After use, keys should be securely zeroizedoverwritten with zeros or random datato prevent recovery from memory dumps. Input validation is essential, including checks for appropriate key lengths (e.g., at least the hash output size for full security) and message integrity to avoid processing malformed data that could lead to bypasses. These measures align with NIST recommendations for secure key management and hash usage in approved modes.
Recent trends highlight HMAC's role in modern authentication frameworks, such as the hmac-secret extension in WebAuthn's CTAP2 protocol, introduced in 2019, which enables authenticators to derive symmetric keys for additional operations like pseudorandom function generation during credential assertions. In authenticated encryption contexts, HMAC serves as a reliable MAC component in encrypt-then-MAC schemes, often as a fallback for AEAD modes like AES-GCM, where GCM's integrated authentication may fail due to nonce reuse or tag truncation, providing a more robust integrity check without the brittleness of GCM's GHASH.

Applications in Protocols

HMAC plays a central role in the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol for ensuring message integrity and authenticity. In TLS versions up to 1.2, HMAC is directly used as the message authentication code (MAC) in the record layer for many cipher suites, such as TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA, where it verifies the integrity of encrypted data. In TLS 1.3, defined in RFC 8446 (2018), HMAC underpins the HKDF construct for key derivation during the handshake process, enabling secure session establishment; additionally, HMAC-based cipher suites like those in RFC 9150 provide authentication and integrity without confidentiality for specialized use cases.
In the Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) suite, HMAC ensures data origin authentication and integrity for network communications. The Authentication Header (AH) protocol exclusively employs HMAC to protect the entire IP packet, including headers, against tampering. Similarly, the Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) mode, as specified in RFC 4303 (2005), optionally integrates HMAC for authentication alongside optional encryption, supporting algorithms like HMAC-SHA-256 for robust packet protection in VPNs and secure tunnels.
HMAC's versatility extends to several other protocols and systems. In JSON Web Tokens (JWTs), RFC 7518 (2015) defines HMAC-based algorithms such as HS256 (HMAC-SHA-256) and HS512 for signing and verifying token integrity, enabling secure stateless authentication in web applications. Kerberos version 5 incorporates HMAC in its checksum and encryption types for ticket protection, including AES-128-CTS-HMAC-SHA1-96 and AES-256-CTS-HMAC-SHA1-96 as specified in RFC 8009 (2017), ensuring mutual authentication in enterprise environments. Amazon Web Services (AWS) uses HMAC-SHA256 in its Signature Version 4 process to authenticate API requests, where clients sign canonical requests with their secret access key to prevent unauthorized access. In blockchain contexts, Ethereum leverages HMAC-SHA512 within BIP-32 for hierarchical deterministic key derivation, generating child keys from a master seed to manage wallet addresses securely.
Key standards formalize HMAC's adoption across protocols. FIPS 198-1 (2008), issued by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), standardizes HMAC for federal government use with approved hash functions like SHA-1 and SHA-256, emphasizing its role in message authentication. In June 2025, NIST proposed the withdrawal of FIPS 198-1, transitioning the specification to NIST SP 800-224 (2025), which updates HMAC to approve SHA-3 family hashes and disallows SHA-1. RFC 8446 outlines deprecation paths for legacy HMAC constructions using weak hashes like MD5 or SHA-1, mandating transitions to stronger variants such as HMAC-SHA-384 to maintain security in evolving protocols.
Recent developments highlight HMAC's adaptability in emerging domains. In post-quantum (PQ) cryptography, HMAC's symmetric design renders it resistant to quantum attacks, allowing its integration into hybrid schemes during NIST's PQ standardization rounds (20222024); for instance, HKDF-HMAC pairs with PQ key encapsulation mechanisms like ML-KEM for secure key derivation in protocols transitioning to quantum-safe systems. NIST SP 800-224 (2025) updates HMAC specifications to incorporate SHA-3, enhancing its suitability for PQ hybrids by supporting larger block sizes and truncation options. For Internet of Things (IoT) applications, HMAC secures the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) via Datagram TLS (DTLS), where it provides MAC functionality in DTLS 1.2 cipher suites for resource-constrained devices; RFC 8323 (2018) extends CoAP over TLS/DTLS transports, enabling HMAC-based authentication in low-power networks like smart grids.

Examples

Computational Illustration

To illustrate the computation of an HMAC, consider a simple example using HMAC-MD5, noting that MD5 is cryptographically insecure and should not be used for new applications; secure alternatives like HMAC-SHA-256 are recommended in practice. We use the standard test case from RFC 2202, with a secret key K consisting of 16 bytes each set to 0x0b and the message M = "Hi There" (8 bytes in ASCII encoding). The block size B for MD5 is 64 bytes.
Since the key length (16 bytes) is less than B, pad K with zeros to reach 64 bytes: the padded key is 0x0b repeated 16 times followed by 0x00 repeated 48 times.
Next, compute the inner padded key by XORing the padded key with the inner padding constant ipad (the byte 0x36 repeated 64 times). The first 16 bytes become 0x0b XOR 0x36 = 0x3d (repeated 16 times), and the remaining 48 bytes are 0x00 XOR 0x36 = 0x36 (repeated 48 times). Concatenate this 64-byte inner padded key with the message M to form the inner input block (72 bytes total).
The inner hash is then the MD5 hash of this inner input block, yielding a 16-byte digest value.
For the outer hash, XOR the padded key with the outer padding constant opad (the byte 0x5c repeated 64 times): the first 16 bytes become 0x0b XOR 0x5c = 0x57 (repeated 16 times), and the remaining 48 bytes are 0x00 XOR 0x5c = 0x5c (repeated 48 times). Concatenate this 64-byte outer padded key with the 16-byte inner hash to form the outer input block (80 bytes total).
The final HMAC tag is the MD5 hash of this outer input block, which equals 0x9294727a3638bb1c13f48ef8158bfc9d.
To verify the tag on the receiving end, the recipient uses the shared secret key to recompute the HMAC on the received message following the same steps and compares the resulting tag with the provided one; a match confirms the message's authenticity and integrity.
Such computations are typically performed using established cryptographic libraries (e.g., OpenSSL or Python's hmac module) rather than manual calculation, and always with secure underlying hash functions in production systems.

Code Snippet

The HMAC construction is typically implemented via the following language-agnostic pseudocode, which outlines the key preparation, padding with inner (ipad) and outer (opad) constants, XOR operations, and nested hash invocations as defined in the NIST standard.
function HMAC(key, message, H):
 B = H.block_size // e.g., 64 bytes for SHA-256
 L = H.output_length // e.g., 32 bytes for SHA-256
 
 // Step 1: Prepare key K to length B
 if length(key) > B:
 K = H(key)
 else if length(key) < B:
 K = key || zeros(B - length(key)) // Append zeros
 else:
 K = key
 
 // Step 2: Compute inner padded block
 ipad = repeat(0x36, B)
 inner = XOR(K, ipad) || message
 
 // Step 3: Compute inner hash
 inner_hash = H(inner)
 
 // Step 4: Compute outer padded block
 opad = repeat(0x5C, B)
 outer = XOR(K, opad) || inner_hash
 
 // Step 5: Compute outer hash (the HMAC)
 hmac_result = H(outer)
 
 return hmac_result // Truncate to desired length t L if needed
This pseudocode follows the procedural steps for any Merkle-Damgrd hash function H, ensuring the key is adjusted to the block size before XORing with the fixed pads.
In Python, the hmac module from the standard library implements this algorithm efficiently, integrating with hashlib for the underlying hash function. The following example computes HMAC-SHA256 for a simple key and message, producing a hexadecimal representation of the digest.
import hmac
import hashlib

key = b'key'
message = b'message'
hmac_obj = hmac.new(key, message, hashlib.sha256)
digest = hmac_obj.digest() # Binary digest
hex_digest = hmac_obj.hexdigest() # Hex string
This code handles key preparation internally per RFC 2104, automatically hashing long keys and padding short ones.
Implementations in other languages offer similar built-in support. In Java, the javax.crypto.Mac class provides HMAC via Mac.getInstance("HmacSHA256").doFinal(message) after initialization with the key. In C++, the OpenSSL library exposes HMAC through functions like HMAC_Init_ex, HMAC_Update, and HMAC_Final for incremental processing.
For secure coding, validate that inputs are bytes-like objects to prevent type errors, and use constant-time comparison functions like Python's hmac.compare_digest for verifying digests against timing attacks. Additionally, select strong hash functions such as SHA-256 or SHA-3 for new applications, avoiding deprecated weak hashes like MD5 and SHA-1, which NIST has disallowed for security-critical uses since 2011 and 2013, respectively.

References

RFC 2104 - HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication

FIPS 198, The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC)

 Keying Hash Functions for Message Authentication - UCSD CSE

New Proofs for NMAC and HMAC: Security Without Collision ...

 Message Authentication using Hash Functions The HMAC ...

https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-107r1.pdf

Cryptographic hash function - Glossary | CSRC

Recommendation for Applications Using Approved Hash Algorithms

Hash Functions | CSRC - NIST Computer Security Resource Center

Hash Functions | CSRC - NIST Computer Security Resource Center

Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithm - Glossary | CSRC

 Constructing VIL-MACs from FIL-MACs - Computer Science

RFC 2104: HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication

 fips pub 180-4 - federal information processing standards publication

 FIPS 198-1, The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC)

https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-224.ipd

 New Proofs for NMAC and HMAC: Security without Collision ...

When Messages are Keys: Is HMAC a dual-PRF?

RFC 6194 - Security Considerations for the SHA-0 and SHA-1 ...

RFC 6151 - Updated Security Considerations for the MD5 Message ...

Guidelines for Mitigating Timing Side Channels Against ... - Intel

 Differential Power Analysis of HMAC SHA-2 in the Hamming Weight ...

 Intel SHA Extensions

 Generic Related-key Attacks for HMAC - Cryptology ePrint Archive

 ANOTHER LOOK AT HMAC 1. Introduction In the first two sections ...

Post-Quantum Cryptography | CSRC

 Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC)

RFC 8446 - The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3

RFC 9150: TLS 1.3 Authentication and Integrity-Only Cipher Suites

RFC 4303 - IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)

RFC 4868: Using HMAC-SHA-256, HMAC-SHA-384, and HMAC ...

RFC 7518 - JSON Web Algorithms (JWA) - IETF Datatracker

RFC 8009 - AES Encryption with HMAC-SHA2 for Kerberos 5

FIPS 198-1, The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC)

Post-Quantum Cryptography | CSRC

SP 800-224, Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC)

RFC 8323 - CoAP (Constrained Application Protocol) over TCP, TLS ...

RFC 2202: Test Cases for HMAC-MD5 and HMAC-SHA-1

hmac Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication Python 3.14 ...

Mac (Java SE 17 & JDK 17) - Oracle Help Center
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion