ID3 algorithm Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
ID3 algorithm
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 The ID3 (Iterative Dichotomiser 3) algorithm is a foundational machine learning method for inducing decision trees from a training dataset consisting of examples with discrete attributes and class labels, enabling classification of objects based on their attribute values. Developed by J. Ross Quinlan at the University of Sydney, it was first presented in the mid-1970s and iteratively refined, with its core implementation detailed in a 1986 publication.
ID3 operates using a top-down, greedy strategy to construct the tree: at each node, it evaluates all candidate attributes and selects the one that maximizes information gain, defined as the reduction in entropy (a measure of impurity) after partitioning the data on that attribute. Entropy for a set with p positive and n negative examples is calculated as $ I(p, n) = -\frac{p}{p+n} \log_2 \frac{p}{p+n} - \frac{n}{p+n} \log_2 \frac{n}{p+n} $, and the gain for an attribute A is $ \text{gain}(A) = I(p, n) - \sum_{v \in \text{values}(A)} \frac{p_i + n_i}{p + n} I(p_i, n_i) $, where the sum weights the entropy in each subset. The process recurses on child nodes until all examples in a subset share the same class or no attributes remain, producing a tree that classifies new instances by traversing from root to leaf.
Originally designed to handle large datasets, such as a dataset of 1.4 million chess endgame positions, ID3 demonstrated predictive accuracies up to 84% on unseen data in early applications, assuming error-free training examples and categorical attributes. It incorporates an iterative mechanism using random subsets (windows) of the training data to build and refine trees, aiding convergence on complex problems. However, the algorithm exhibits biases toward attributes with many distinct values, which can lead to overly specific trees, and it does not natively support continuous attributes, missing values, or noisy data without extensions. ID3's influence extends to modern decision tree methods, serving as the direct precursor to Quinlan's C4.5 algorithm, which addressed these limitations through enhancements like gain ratio and pruning.

Introduction

Overview

The ID3 (Iterative Dichotomiser 3) algorithm is a supervised machine learning method for constructing decision trees from labeled training data. Its core goal is to create a tree structure that classifies instances based on their feature values, enabling accurate prediction of target class labels.
ID3 adopts a greedy, top-down approach to build the tree by iteratively selecting attributes that best reduce classification uncertainty at each step. The output is a decision tree where internal nodes represent tests on attribute values, branches indicate the possible outcomes of those tests, and leaf nodes assign the predicted class labels.
Designed primarily for discrete attributes and categorical target variables, ID3 excels with nominal data and uses metrics like entropy and information gain for attribute selection.

History

The ID3 algorithm, standing for Iterative Dichotomiser 3, was developed by J. Ross Quinlan as the third iteration in a series of his rule induction systems, building on earlier work such as his 1969 problem-solving learning scheme. It emerged within the broader context of early artificial intelligence research during the 1970s and 1980s, which focused on knowledge acquisition and the construction of expert systems to automate decision-making processes from data. Quinlan first introduced ID3 in 1979 through a chapter on discovering rules by induction from large collections of examples, motivated by a challenging chess endgame induction task posed by Donald Michie. This initial version replaced the cost-driven lookahead of prior systems like Hunt's Concept Learning System (CLS) from 1966 with an information-driven approach to attribute selection.
The algorithm gained formal structure and wider recognition with Quinlan's 1986 paper, "Induction of Decision Trees," published in the Machine Learning journal, which detailed ID3's methodology, including the use of information gain as the criterion for selecting attributes to split data. This publication marked a key milestone, as it synthesized decision tree induction techniques that had been applied in various systems and demonstrated ID3's effectiveness on practical tasks, influencing the development of subsequent machine learning algorithms. Quinlan provided a freely available implementation of ID3 as part of the 1986 system description, which facilitated its adoption in early machine learning toolkits and research environments.
ID3's evolution continued with refinements documented in Quinlan's 1983 work on learning efficient classification procedures, particularly for chess endgames, leading to related systems like ACLS in 1983 and ASSISTANT in 1984. Ultimately, ID3 was succeeded by the C4.5 algorithm in 1993, which Quinlan developed to address limitations such as the handling of continuous attributes and missing values, further advancing decision tree methodologies.

Core Concepts

Entropy

In the ID3 algorithm, entropy serves as a fundamental measure of the impurity or uncertainty present in a dataset, quantifying the average amount of information required to predict the class of an instance within that set. This concept draws from Claude Shannon's information theory, where entropy represents the expected information content or surprise associated with a random variable's outcome.
The mathematical formulation of entropy for a dataset $ S $ with $ c $ distinct classes is given by:
H(S)=i=1cpilog2(pi)
H(S) = -\sum_{i=1}^{c} p_i \log_2(p_i)
H(S)=i=1cpilog2(pi)
where $ p_i $ is the proportion of instances in $ S $ belonging to class $ i $. This formula arises from the principle that entropy is zero when the dataset is pure (all instances belong to the same class, so $ p_i = 1 $ for one $ i $ and 0 otherwise), and it reaches its maximum value when the classes are uniformly distributed, indicating maximum uncertainty.
For instance, consider a binary classification dataset with 50% positive and 50% negative instances ($ p_1 = p_2 = 0.5 $); the entropy is $ H(S) = - (0.5 \log_2 0.5 + 0.5 \log_2 0.5) = 1 $ bit, representing the highest possible uncertainty for two classes.
Entropy exhibits key properties: it is always non-negative, bounded above by $ \log_2(c) $ for $ c $ classes, and decreases as the dataset becomes more homogeneous or pure. In ID3, entropy is computed for the root dataset to assess its initial impurity before any splits are considered. This measure is later incorporated into the evaluation of information gain for attribute selection, though the focus here remains on entropy itself as a standalone impurity metric.

Information Gain

Information gain is a key metric in the ID3 algorithm used to evaluate and select the best attribute for splitting a dataset at each decision tree node. It quantifies the reduction in entropy, or uncertainty, about the target class after partitioning the data based on the values of a given attribute. By choosing the attribute that maximizes information gain, ID3 aims to create splits that most effectively separate the classes, leading to more homogeneous subsets.
The mathematical formulation of information gain for an attribute AAA over a dataset SSS is given by:
Gain(A)=H(S)vValues(A)SvSH(Sv)
\text{Gain}(A) = H(S) - \sum_{v \in \text{Values}(A)} \frac{|S_v|}{|S|} \cdot H(S_v)
Gain(A)=H(S)vValues(A)SSvH(Sv)
Here, H(S)H(S)H(S) represents the entropy of the original dataset SSS, $ \text{Values}(A) $ are the possible values of attribute AAA, and SvS_vSv is the subset of SSS where attribute AAA takes value vvv. This formula subtracts the weighted average entropy of the resulting subsets from the parent entropy to yield the gain. Entropy HHH serves as the baseline measure of impurity in the dataset prior to the split.
To compute information gain, first calculate the entropy of the full dataset SSS. Then, for each attribute AAA, partition SSS into subsets SvS_vSv based on AAA's values, compute the entropy H(Sv)H(S_v)H(Sv) for each subset, and determine the weighted average of these entropies using the proportion of instances in each subset (Sv/S|S_v|/|S|Sv/S). Subtract this average from H(S)H(S)H(S) to obtain Gain(A)\text{Gain}(A)Gain(A). The attribute with the highest gain is selected for the split. This process is repeated recursively for subsequent nodes.
A representative example illustrates this computation using a weather dataset for predicting whether to play tennis, with 14 instances and attributes including Outlook (sunny, overcast, rain). The dataset has 9 positive (play) and 5 negative (no play) outcomes, yielding an initial entropy H(S)0.940H(S) \approx 0.940H(S)0.940 bits.
OutlookPlayNo Play
Sunny23
Overcast40
Rain32
For Outlook, the subsets have entropies of approximately 0.971 bits (sunny), 0 bits (overcast), and 0.971 bits (rain). The weighted average entropy is (5/14)0.971+(4/14)0+(5/14)0.9710.693(5/14) \times 0.971 + (4/14) \times 0 + (5/14) \times 0.971 \approx 0.693(5/14)0.971+(4/14)0+(5/14)0.9710.693 bits, so Gain(Outlook)0.9400.693=0.247\text{Gain}(\text{Outlook}) \approx 0.940 - 0.693 = 0.247Gain(Outlook)0.9400.693=0.247 bits. Comparable calculations for other attributes like Temperature yield lower gains (e.g., 0.029 bits), making Outlook the preferred split as it provides the highest entropy reduction.
Higher information gain indicates a more effective attribute for reducing uncertainty and improving class separation, with ID3 selecting the maximum-gain attribute at each node to build the tree greedily. This approach promotes simpler trees that generalize well, as demonstrated by predictive accuracies around 84% on unseen chess position data in early evaluations. However, the metric has a bias toward attributes with many distinct values, as they tend to produce more subsets and lower weighted entropies even if not highly predictive; this issue is mitigated in subsequent algorithms like C4.5 through normalized measures such as gain ratio.

Algorithm Description

Step-by-Step Process

The ID3 algorithm constructs a decision tree from a given training dataset through a top-down, recursive process that begins at the root node with the entire dataset. The root node represents the full set of training instances, each described by a vector of attribute values and associated with a class label. This initialization sets the stage for partitioning the data based on selected attributes to progressively refine class predictions.
The core procedure is recursive and operates on a current subset of instances at each node. First, the algorithm checks if all instances in the subset belong to the same class; if so, it designates the node as a leaf and labels it with that class, terminating further branching since no additional discrimination is needed. Second, if the subset contains instances from multiple classes but no remaining attributes are available for splitting, the node becomes a leaf labeled with the majority class in the subset to provide the most probable prediction. Third, in cases where the subset is emptysuch as when an attribute value has no corresponding instancesthe node is labeled with the majority class from the parent subset or marked as null, depending on the implementation variant. These base cases ensure the tree construction halts appropriately, preventing infinite recursion.
If neither base case applies, the algorithm proceeds by evaluating all available attributes and selecting the one that maximizes information gain, a measure of how effectively the attribute reduces uncertainty in class classification for the current subset. It then creates a child node for each distinct value of the selected attribute, partitioning the subset into corresponding sub-subsets based on those values. The recursive process is then applied independently to each sub-subset at these child nodes, continuing to build branches until base cases are met throughout the tree. This step-wise partitioning refines the decision boundaries, with the tree growing depth-first until all leaves are pure or no further splits are possible.
ID3 employs a greedy strategy in attribute selection, choosing the locally optimal split at each node without backtracking or considering global optimality, which promotes efficiency but may lead to suboptimal trees in some scenarios. In the original ID3, instances with missing values for the selected attribute are handled by splitting their weight proportionally among all branches, proportional to the number of instances with each known value in the current subset. Extensions like C4.5 introduced additional methods, such as surrogate splits, for more robust handling. The process concludes when the entire tree is built, yielding a structure where paths from root to leaves encode classification rules.

Pseudocode

The ID3 algorithm is formally described through pseudocode that captures its recursive, top-down construction of decision trees from a set of training examples. This representation assumes categorical (discrete) attributes and requires no explicit discretization step, as continuous attributes must be preprocessed into discrete bins before application.
The core procedure, originally presented in a Lisp-like pseudocode in Quinlan's 1986 paper, takes as input a set of examples, the available attributes, and the target classification attribute; it returns a decision tree node. Modern implementations of this pseudocode are commonly expressed in languages such as Python or Java for educational and practical purposes.
To support attribute selection, helper functions compute entropy and information gain, where entropy measures the impurity of a set of examples with respect to the target attribute, and information gain quantifies the reduction in entropy from partitioning on a given attribute.
function Entropy(examples, target_attribute):
 if len(examples) == 0:
 return 0
 proportions = compute frequency proportions of each target value in examples
 return - (p * log(p)) for each proportion p in proportions
function InformationGain(examples, attribute, target_attribute):
 base_entropy = Entropy(examples, target_attribute)
 values = unique values of attribute in examples
 weighted_entropy = 0
 for each value v in values:
 sub_examples = {e in examples | e == v}
 weight = len(sub_examples) / len(examples)
 weighted_entropy += weight * Entropy(sub_examples, target_attribute)
 return base_entropy - weighted_entropy
function ID3(examples, attributes, target_attribute):
 create root_node
 if len(examples) == 0:
 label root_node with most common target value in parent context
 return root_node
 if all examples share the same target value v:
 label root_node as leaf with v
 return root_node
 if attributes is empty:
 label root_node as leaf with most common target value in examples
 return root_node
 gains = {}
 for each attr in attributes:
 gains = InformationGain(examples, attr, target_attribute)
 best_attribute = argmax over attr in attributes of gains
 label root_node with best_attribute
 remaining_attributes = attributes \ {best_attribute}
 for each value v in unique values of best_attribute:
 sub_examples = {e in examples | e == v}
 if len(sub_examples) == 0:
 create leaf child_node labeled with most common target value in examples
 else:
 child_node = ID3(sub_examples, remaining_attributes, target_attribute)
 attach child_node to root_node as branch for value v
 return root_node

Properties and Analysis

Key Properties

The ID3 algorithm is inherently greedy, as it selects the attribute that maximizes information gain at each node to make locally optimal splitting decisions, which promotes efficient tree construction but can result in trees that are suboptimal with respect to global structure. This greedy nature stems from its top-down, recursive approach, where the choice at one level does not consider downstream impacts, allowing for rapid development of decision rules without exhaustive search over all possible trees.
A prominent strength of ID3 lies in its interpretability, producing decision trees that are visually simple and easily comprehensible, enabling users to trace the logical paths from root to leaves and understand the hierarchical decision-making process. This readability facilitates applications where explaining the model's reasoning is crucial, such as in domains requiring transparent rule extraction from data.
In terms of efficiency, ID3 exhibits a time complexity of O(nm2)O(n \cdot m^2)O(nm2), where nnn is the number of training instances and mmm is the number of attributes, arising from the repeated computation of information gain across attributes at each of up to mmm levels in the tree; this renders it well-suited for small to medium datasets but less scalable for very large ones.
ID3 demonstrates a bias toward multi-valued attributes, as the information gain metric inherently favors those with more distinct outcomes due to the way entropy is partitioned across branches, which may lead to the selection of attributes that split the data finely but risk overfitting if the additional values do not correlate strongly with the target class.
Unlike later extensions, the original ID3 performs no post-pruning after tree construction but incorporates a pre-pruning mechanism using a chi-square test to halt splitting a node if there is insufficient evidence of dependence between the attribute and class, resulting in a tree that accommodates the training data while attempting to avoid unnecessary complexity, though this can still lead to overfitting on noisy data.
ID3 is specifically designed to process categorical attributes and discrete target classes, creating branches for each possible value of the selected attribute; it cannot directly handle continuous features, necessitating discretization techniques like binning in contemporary implementations to adapt it for mixed data types.

Limitations

The ID3 algorithm is unable to directly handle continuous attributes, necessitating their discretization into discrete bins prior to tree construction, a process that can introduce bias by arbitrarily defining thresholds and result in information loss from the original data distribution. This limitation stems from the algorithm's design for nominal attributes only, as outlined in its foundational description.
ID3 exhibits sensitivity to noisy data, lacking mechanisms for outlier detection or noise reduction beyond its chi-square pre-pruning, which often leads to overly complex trees that overfit the training set and perform poorly on unseen examples.
The attribute selection process in ID3 favors attributes with a larger number of distinct values, as they tend to yield higher information gain regardless of their actual relevance to the target class, introducing a bias that can result in suboptimal feature choices. This issue arises from the reliance on raw information gain without normalization.
In terms of computational efficiency, ID3 incurs a time complexity of O(nm2)O(n \cdot m^2)O(nm2) in the worst case, where mmm is the number of attributes and nnn is the number of training examples, which becomes prohibitive for large datasets due to repeated entropy calculations across subsets at each node. In the worst case, with extensive attribute sets and deep trees, this can approach higher scaling in practice for exhaustive evaluations.
Although the original ID3 formulation from 1986 includes support for missing values through probabilistic fractional assignmentdistributing instances proportionally across branches based on available datathe algorithm does not natively handle them in all basic implementations, often relying on workarounds like complete-case deletion that can reduce dataset size and introduce further bias.
Finally, ID3 is designed exclusively for classification tasks with discrete target labels and cannot be applied to regression problems, where continuous outputs are predicted. Its greedy selection strategy, while efficient, may also trap the algorithm in local optima, yielding trees that are not globally optimal.

Applications and Extensions

Practical Usage

The ID3 algorithm finds practical application in domains requiring interpretable classification models from categorical data, such as medical diagnosis, where it aids in predicting diseases based on symptoms like in breast tumor detection from ultrasonic images. In finance, it supports credit scoring by classifying applicants' risk profiles using attributes like income and employment history, leveraging its foundational role in decision tree methods. For simple pattern recognition, ID3 excels in tasks like chess position evaluation, processing large datasets of attributes to classify board states with high accuracy on unseen examples.
Prior to applying ID3, datasets must be prepared to align with its requirement for categorical attributes; continuous features are converted to categorical via binning or threshold-based discretization, such as sorting values and selecting midpoints between pairs as split points. Since ID3 assumes no missing values, common preprocessing steps include removing affected instances or imputing them using methods like majority class or attribute mode, based on class distributions in the dataset.
Implementations of ID3 are available in several tools, including the Id3 classifier in Weka for nominal attributes without missing values. In Python's scikit-learn library, the DecisionTreeClassifier with the criterion='entropy' parameter approximates ID3's information gain for building trees. R users can access ID3 via the party package's wrappers or conditional inference trees that extend its principles.
A classic example is Quinlan's PlayTennis dataset, which uses attributes like outlook (sunny, overcast, rainy), temperature, humidity, and wind to classify whether to play tennis; ID3 selects "outlook" as the root node due to its highest information gain, resulting in a tree that accurately predicts decisions for 14 instances.
Best practices for ID3 emphasize its suitability for datasets where interpretability and simple splits are prioritized to prevent excessive complexity. To mitigate overfitting, integrate k-fold cross-validation during evaluation, partitioning data into folds for repeated training and testing to estimate generalization performance reliably.
ID3 remains a staple in machine learning courses for its simplicity in illustrating entropy and tree induction concepts. It indirectly influences ensemble methods like random forests, where multiple decision trees inspired by ID3's structure aggregate predictions for robust classification.
As of 2025, ID3 sees continued use in educational AI tools for interactive decision tree simulations. Recent research applications include sports performance management, tourism path planning, and scholarship prediction systems.

Related Algorithms

The ID3 algorithm has significantly influenced the development of subsequent decision tree methods, particularly through its emphasis on information-theoretic measures for attribute selection. One direct successor is the C4.5 algorithm, developed by J. Ross Quinlan in 1993 as an extension to address ID3's limitations with real-valued attributes and incomplete data. C4.5 introduces discretization thresholds for continuous features, probabilistic handling of missing values by distributing instances proportionally across branches, and post-pruning techniques to reduce overfitting by replacing subtrees with leaves based on error rate estimates. Instead of ID3's information gain, C4.5 employs gain ratio, which normalizes gain by the intrinsic information of the attribute split to mitigate bias toward features with many values. This algorithm was later commercialized by Quinlan as C5.0 in 1998, incorporating further optimizations like boosting for improved accuracy and rule-based representations alongside trees, and it remains available through RuleQuest Research.
Another influential contemporary is the Classification and Regression Trees (CART) algorithm, introduced by Leo Breiman, Jerome H. Friedman, Richard A. Olshen, and Charles J. Stone in 1984. Unlike ID3's multi-way splits aligned with attribute values, CART enforces binary splits at each node, enabling both classification and regression tasks by predicting class labels or continuous outcomes, respectively. It uses Gini impurity as the default splitting criterion for classification, which measures the probability of misclassifying a randomly chosen instance, though it can incorporate information gain for consistency with ID3-like approaches. CART also includes cost-complexity pruning to balance tree depth against predictive error on validation data.
A notable variant in the ID3 lineage is CHAID (Chi-squared Automatic Interaction Detection), proposed by Gordon V. Kass in 1980, which adapts the recursive partitioning idea for categorical data using statistical hypothesis testing. CHAID employs the chi-squared test to evaluate multi-way splits, merging categories with non-significant differences (p > 0.05) to form statistically homogeneous groups, and it supports both classification and interaction detection without requiring entropy-based measures. This focus on significance testing makes CHAID particularly suited for exploratory analysis in social sciences and market research.
ID3's information gain concept has broadly inspired impurity measures in later algorithms, serving as a foundational metric for quantifying attribute relevance in decision trees. This influence extends to ensemble methods, where ID3-style trees form the building blocks; for instance, random forests, developed by Breiman in 2001, aggregate multiple CART-like trees trained on bootstrapped samples with random feature subsets to reduce variance and improve generalization. Similarly, gradient boosting frameworks, such as those outlined by Jerome H. Friedman in 2001, iteratively fit shallow decision trees (often binary like CART) to residuals, leveraging ID3's partitioning logic to minimize loss functions in sequential ensembles. These advancements highlight ID3's role in enabling scalable, high-performance tree-based learning.
In modern contexts, ID3-derived methods continue to evolve within automated machine learning (AutoML) frameworks. For example, H2O.ai's AutoML platform, updated through 2024, integrates decision tree learners like GBM and random forestsrooted in ID3 principlesfor automated model selection and hyperparameter tuning on large-scale datasets.

References

Induction of decision trees | Machine Learning

C4.5 - ScienceDirect.com

 Induction of decision trees - Machine Learning (Theory)

https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=zsDIdRoAAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao

C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning | Guide books

A mathematical theory of communication | Nokia Bell Labs Journals ...

https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom/mlbook.html

 A comparative study of decision tree ID3 and C4.5

 An improved ID3 algorithm based on variable precision ...

None

What is a Decision Tree & How to Make One (+ Template) - Appinio

Iterative Dichotomiser 3 (ID3) Algorithm From Scratch - GeeksforGeeks

Id3

1.10. Decision Trees scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

ID3 - an R/Weka Classifier Trees in talgalili/HBP - rdrr.io

Building a Decision Tree from Scratch with ID3 Algorithm

Overfitting in Machine Learning: What It Is and How to Prevent It

Decision Trees and ID3 Learning Algorithm - Lecture 3 - Class Central

Random Forest Algorithm in Machine Learning - GeeksforGeeks

Implementation of decision trees for embedded systems

C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning by J. Ross Quinlan. Morgan ...

 Machine Learning Approach To Augmenting News Headline ...

Classification and Regression Trees | Leo Breiman, Jerome ...

An Exploratory Technique for Investigating Large - jstor

(PDF) CHAID and Earlier Supervised Tree Methods - ResearchGate

 Evaluating the Impact of GINI Index and Information Gain on ...

 1 RANDOM FORESTS Leo Breiman Statistics Department University ...

H2O AutoML: Automatic Machine Learning

 H2O AutoML: Scalable Automatic Machine Learning
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion