ifconfig Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
ifconfig
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 ifconfig (short for "interface configuration") is a command-line utility in Unix-like operating systems for configuring, controlling, and querying TCP/IP network interface parameters. It originated in 4.2BSD as part of the BSD TCP/IP implementation and has since become a standard tool across various Unix variants, including Linux and FreeBSD.
The primary functions of ifconfig include displaying the current configuration of network interfaces, assigning IP addresses and netmasks, enabling or disabling interfaces, and setting parameters such as the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) or broadcast addresses. For example, the basic syntax allows users to view all interfaces with ifconfig -a or configure a specific interface like ifconfig eth0 192.168.1.1 netmask 255.255.255.0 up. It operates on kernel-resident network interfaces and is typically invoked at boot time to initialize connectivity or during runtime for troubleshooting and adjustments.
While historically ubiquitous, ifconfig is part of the older net-tools package and has been deprecated in many modern Linux distributions in favor of the more versatile ip command from the iproute2 suite, which provides enhanced support for contemporary networking features like IPv6 and VLANs. Despite this, ifconfig remains available in most systems for backward compatibility and is still widely used for basic tasks due to its simplicity. It supports various address families, including IPv4 (inet), IPv6 (inet6), and others like AX.25 or IPX, though its capabilities are limited compared to newer tools.

Overview

Purpose and Functionality

The ifconfig command, short for "interface configuration," is a utility in Unix-like operating systems designed to display and configure TCP/IP network parameters for network interfaces, including IP addresses, netmasks, and broadcast addresses. It serves as a fundamental tool for managing network connectivity by interacting directly with the system's kernel to query or modify interface settings.
Its primary functions include querying the current status of network interfaces to retrieve details such as assigned addresses and operational state, assigning or changing IP addresses to enable communication on a network, enabling or disabling interfaces to control their activity, and setting hardware addresses (such as MAC addresses) when supported by the underlying driver. These capabilities allow administrators to perform essential network diagnostics and adjustments without needing more complex tools for basic tasks.
The command operates on kernel-resident network interfaces, meaning it modifies parameters stored in the operating system's kernel rather than user-space configurations, and is commonly invoked during system boot to initialize interfaces or at runtime for temporary changes that persist only until reboot. A key aspect of its design is the simplicity that permits any user to view interface status without elevated privileges, while modifications require superuser access to ensure security. Originating from Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) Unix, ifconfig evolved as a straightforward method for basic network setup in early Unix environments.

Platform Availability

The ifconfig command is natively included in BSD variants such as FreeBSD and OpenBSD, where it has been a standard utility since its introduction in 4.2BSD for configuring network interfaces.
In Linux distributions, ifconfig is provided as part of the net-tools package, which was pre-installed in some older releases, such as Ubuntu 16.04 LTS and CentOS up to version 7, but it is optional or absent by default in modern distributions including Fedora (since approximately version 16) and Debian 12 and later.
The command remains available in other Unix-like systems, including Oracle Solaris where it supports manual IP address assignment and interface parameter configuration, IBM AIX for displaying and modifying network interface settings, macOS as a legacy tool for viewing interface details, and various embedded Linux systems often via BusyBox or full net-tools implementations.
Installation of ifconfig on supported platforms typically involves package managers, such as sudo apt install net-tools on Debian-based systems like Ubuntu, sudo yum install net-tools on older Red Hat-based distributions like CentOS 7, or sudo dnf install net-tools on newer ones like Fedora and CentOS 8+; alternatively, it can be compiled from source using the net-tools codebase available from official repositories.
As of 2025, ifconfig continues to function on major Linux distributions where installed but is marked as deprecated in their manual pages, with recommendations to use the ip command from the iproute2 suite due to net-tools' limited maintenance and incomplete IPv6 support.

History

Origins in BSD

The ifconfig utility was introduced in the 4.2BSD release of August 1983, as a core component of the Berkeley Software Distribution's implementation of TCP/IP networking protocols. Developed by the Computer Systems Research Group (CSRG) at the University of California, Berkeley, it addressed the growing need for tools to manage network interfaces in early Unix systems supporting internetworking. The CSRG, formed in 1980, led the effort to integrate a full TCP/IP stack into BSD, drawing from prior work on ARPANET protocols to enable reliable data transmission across heterogeneous networks.
Initially designed to configure kernel-resident network interfaces, ifconfig provided essential functions for assigning IP addresses, setting subnet masks, and displaying interface status, which were critical for the rudimentary internetworking environments of the time. Its commands allowed administrators to activate interfaces, monitor packet statistics, and apply basic parameters derived from ARPANET standards, such as those outlined in early RFCs for IP and ICMP. This functionality supported the transition from proprietary networking to open, protocol-based communication, filling a gap in the original AT&T Unix distributions that lacked native TCP/IP support.
A key milestone in ifconfig's early history was its rapid adoption within academic and research institutions, where 4.2BSD secured over a thousand site licenses within 18 months of release. This widespread deployment in university computing labs and government-funded projects, such as those connected to ARPANET, established ifconfig as a foundational tool that influenced subsequent Unix networking standards, including the sockets API and interface management conventions later standardized in POSIX. By providing a simple, command-line interface for protocol configuration, it facilitated experimentation with emerging internet technologies and set precedents for cross-vendor compatibility in Unix ecosystems.

Adoption in Linux and Other Systems

The ifconfig utility was ported to Linux in the early 1990s through the adaptation of BSD networking code, with Alan Cox leading the effort on the Net-2 and Net-3 distributions integrated into kernel version 0.99.10 in the summer of 1993. This port brought essential user-space tools, including ifconfig as part of the net-tools suite, enabling kernel-resident network interface configuration for the burgeoning Linux ecosystem.
Following its integration, ifconfig achieved widespread adoption across major Linux distributions, becoming a core component for network management from the outset. Debian included it in early releases starting in 1993, aligning with the system's initial kernel builds that supported TCP/IP networking, while Red Hat incorporated net-tools, featuring ifconfig, in its inaugural 1.0 release in May 1995. In commercial Unix variants, ifconfig was similarly entrenched; Solaris, derived from System V Release 4 (SVR4), adapted the command for its networking stack as early as Solaris 2.0 in June 1992, ensuring compatibility with Unix standards.
It was also directly inherited in BSD derivatives such as FreeBSD (from 1993) and NetBSD (from 1993), maintaining the original implementation with enhancements. Key developments in the 1990s expanded ifconfig's capabilities to match evolving hardware and protocols. Enhancements supported Ethernet interfaces via drivers largely authored by Donald Becker, facilitating broad compatibility with network cards in Linux kernels from 1.0 onward. Support for Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) connections was added around 1994, allowing dynamic IP assignment over dial-up links, while preliminary wireless interface handling emerged later in the decade to accommodate emerging 802.11 standards. Ifconfig remained a de facto Unix tool, providing a reliable mechanism for runtime and boot-time configuration, often invoked in init scripts to activate interfaces and set parameters during system startup. This persisted across distributions until the systemd era in the mid-2010s, when tools like ip from iproute2 began supplanting it in favor of more scalable, kernel-aligned approaches.

Syntax and Basic Usage

Command Syntax

The general syntax of the ifconfig command follows the structure ifconfig ] , where interface specifies the network interface (e.g., eth0), address_family denotes the protocol such as inet or inet6, address assigns the IP address, dest_address sets the destination for point-to-point links, and parameters configure additional options. This structure allows for both querying and configuring network interfaces in Unix-like systems.
When invoked without specifying an interface, ifconfig displays the configuration and status of all active network interfaces on the system. Including the -a flag extends this to show all interfaces, even those that are inactive.
Key parameters provide an overview of common configurations, including up to bring an interface online and enable it for use, down to shut it down and disable it, netmask followed by a value to define the subnet mask (e.g., 255.255.255.0), broadcast to set or clear the broadcast address, and mtu followed by a number to adjust the maximum transmission unit size. These parameters are applied after the interface and address specifications in the command line.
Configuration changes, such as assigning addresses or modifying parameters, require superuser privileges, typically obtained by running the command as root or using sudo, while simply displaying interface status does not. Common error outputs include "SIOCSIFADDR: No such device" when attempting to configure an interface that does not exist on the system.

Displaying Interface Status

The ifconfig command, when invoked without arguments, displays the status of all currently active network interfaces on the system. To view details for a specific interface, such as eth0, the command is used as ifconfig eth0. This read-only mode provides essential diagnostic information without altering configurations.
The output typically includes several key fields for each interface. The inet field shows the IPv4 address, followed by netmask for the subnet mask and broadcast for the broadcast address. The ether field displays the hardware (MAC) address, limited to 8 bytes in this tool. Additional details encompass the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU), which defaults to 1500 bytes for Ethernet, and statistics for received (RX) and transmitted (TX) packets, including counts of packets, bytes, errors, drops, overruns, and frame errors. For example, a sample output for an Ethernet interface might appear as:
eth0: flags=4163<UP,BROADCAST,RUNNING,MULTICAST> mtu 1500
 inet 192.168.1.100 netmask 255.255.255.0 broadcast 192.168.1.255
 ether 00:11:22:33:44:55 txqueuelen 1000 (Ethernet)
 RX packets 12345 bytes 1234567 (1.2 MiB) errors 0 dropped 0 overruns 0 frame 0
 TX packets 6789 bytes 987654 (987.6 KiB) errors 0 dropped 0 overruns 0 carrier 0 collisions 0
These RX and TX statistics are aggregated across alias interfaces since Linux kernel 2.2.
Interface flags, enclosed in angle brackets, indicate operational status and capabilities. The UP flag means the interface is administratively enabled, while RUNNING signifies it is operationally active with a detected carrier signal. BROADCAST denotes support for broadcast packets, (/page/Loopback) identifies loopback interfaces like lo, and (/page/Multicast) indicates multicast packet handling capability. For the loopback interface, flags often include (/page/Loopback) and UP, confirming internal communication routing.
This display functionality aids in troubleshooting network connectivity issues, such as verifying if an interface has obtained an IP address via DHCP or checking for high error rates in packet statistics that might indicate hardware faults. It is commonly used post-boot to confirm link status and ensure interfaces are active before further network operations.
A notable limitation is that ifconfig without the -a option only shows active (up) interfaces and does not display IPv6 addresses by default unless they are explicitly configured and active; the -a flag is required to view all interfaces, including those that are down, for comprehensive status checks.

Configuration Options

IP Address and Subnet Management

The ifconfig command enables the assignment of IPv4 addresses to network interfaces, typically specifying the interface name followed by the IP address and optional netmask. For instance, to configure an Ethernet interface with a specific IP and subnet mask, the syntax ifconfig eth0 192.168.1.10 netmask 255.255.255.0 sets the local IP address to 192.168.1.10 and the netmask to 255.255.255.0, defining a /24 subnet. This operation applies the configuration immediately to the kernel's network stack, allowing the interface to participate in IP-based communication within the specified subnet.
Broadcast addresses can be explicitly set or enabled using the broadcast keyword, which designates the address for sending packets to all hosts on the local network. An example is ifconfig eth0 broadcast 192.168.1.255, which configures the broadcast address for a /24 subnet ending in .255, enabling broadcast traffic while the interface is active. By default, ifconfig infers the broadcast address from the IP and netmask if not specified, but manual setting ensures compatibility in varied network environments.
For point-to-point links, such as those used in PPP or tunnel connections, ifconfig supports the pointopoint option to establish a direct bidirectional link between two specific IP addresses. The command ifconfig ppp0 10.0.0.1 pointopoint 10.0.0.2 assigns 10.0.0.1 as the local address and 10.0.0.2 as the remote peer's address, routing traffic exclusively between these endpoints without broadcast support. This mode is essential for serial or virtual private network interfaces requiring unicast-only communication.
For IPv6, addresses are added using the inet6 add option with CIDR notation, e.g., ifconfig eth0 inet6 add 2001:db8::1/64.
Configurations made via ifconfig are runtime changes applied directly to the operating system's kernel and do not persist across reboots, as they do not modify underlying system files. For persistent setup, Debian relies on files such as /etc/network/interfaces, while Ubuntu (since 18.04) uses Netplan YAML files in /etc/netplan/ to define static IP, netmask, and broadcast details loaded during boot. This contrast highlights ifconfig's role in temporary or scripted adjustments rather than long-term network policy.
While ifconfig primarily handles IPv4, it supports Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) indirectly by accepting arbitrary netmasks rather than prefix lengths, allowing flexible subnet sizes beyond traditional classful boundaries (e.g., a /28 subnet via netmask 255.255.255.240). Users must calculate and provide the dotted-decimal netmask equivalent, as direct CIDR notation like /24 is not natively parsed.

Interface Activation and Parameters

The ifconfig command provides essential options for activating or deactivating network interfaces and adjusting key operational parameters, allowing administrators to control interface state and behavior without rebooting the system.
To enable an interface, the up option marks it as active, permitting the transmission and reception of network packets; this is typically invoked as ifconfig <interface> up, such as ifconfig eth0 up. Conversely, the down option disables the interface, halting all packet processing to conserve resources or isolate issues, using the syntax ifconfig <interface> down, for example ifconfig eth0 down. These operations are fundamental for managing interface availability, with up often applied automatically when assigning an address but explicitly used for manual control.
The Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) can be adjusted to optimize packet sizes for specific network topologies; the mtu option sets this value in bytes, as in ifconfig <interface> mtu 9000 to enable jumbo frames that support payloads up to 9000 bytes, reducing overhead in high-throughput environments like data centers. Not all interfaces support arbitrary MTU values, and mismatches can cause fragmentation or packet drops.
For routing prioritization, the metric option assigns a numerical cost to the interface, influencing path selection in routing tables; higher values indicate lower preference, set via ifconfig <interface> metric <value>, such as ifconfig eth0 metric 1 for a primary route. This feature is available in BSD-derived systems but not supported in GNU/Linux implementations of ifconfig.
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) handling is controlled with the arp flag, which is enabled by default to map IP addresses to MAC addresses; disabling it via ifconfig <interface> -arp prevents ARP queries and responses, useful in secured or point-to-point setups to mitigate spoofing risks.
These parameters are commonly employed in automation scripts for dynamic network adjustments, such as bringing interfaces online during system boot or after hardware modifications like NIC replacements, ensuring seamless connectivity without manual intervention.

Advanced Features

MAC Address Manipulation

The ifconfig command displays the Media Access Control (MAC) address of a network interface in its standard output, typically under the "ether" field for Ethernet interfaces, formatted as a hexadecimal string such as ether 00:11:22:33:44:55. This information is part of the hardware address details shown when querying an active interface, providing a quick way to view the Layer 2 identifier assigned to the device.
To change the MAC address using ifconfig, the interface must first be taken down, as the operation requires root privileges and cannot be performed on an active link. The syntax involves running sudo ifconfig <interface> down followed by sudo ifconfig <interface> hw (/page/Ether) <new-mac-address>, and then sudo ifconfig <interface> up to reactivate it; for example, sudo ifconfig eth0 hw (/page/Ether) 00:11:22:33:44:55. This process enables temporary MAC address spoofing, often used for network testing, privacy enhancement by masking the device's identity, or bypassing certain access controls. However, such changes are not persistent and reset upon system reboot or driver reload, reverting to the hardware's original MAC address.
Not all network interfaces support MAC address manipulation with ifconfig; virtual interfaces like loopback (lo) lack a physical MAC address entirely and do not display or allow changes in this field. Additionally, support is hardware-dependent, as some network interface cards (NICs) or drivers may restrict alterations due to firmware limitations or security features.
While MAC address manipulation via ifconfig is useful for legitimate purposes, it carries security risks if misused, such as facilitating MAC flooding attacks where an attacker spoofs numerous addresses to overwhelm a switch's content-addressable memory (CAM) table, potentially causing broadcast storms and network denial-of-service. Proper safeguards, like port security on switches, are essential to mitigate such threats.

Broadcast and Multicast Settings

The ifconfig command allows configuration of the broadcast address for a network interface, which specifies the destination for broadcast packets sent on that interface. To set the broadcast address, the broadcast option is used followed by the desired IP address, typically derived from the network address with all host bits set to 1. For example, the command ifconfig eth0 broadcast 192.168.1.255 assigns the broadcast address 192.168.1.255 to the eth0 interface, enabling the interface to send and receive broadcast traffic directed to that address. This configuration is particularly useful in environments where non-standard broadcast schemes are employed, such as certain proprietary network implementations.
For multicast settings, ifconfig provides the allmulti option to enable or disable reception of all multicast packets on the interface, bypassing normal multicast group filtering. The command ifconfig eth0 allmulti activates all-multicast mode, allowing the interface to receive every multicast packet on the network regardless of group membership, while ifconfig eth0 -allmulti disables it. This mode is beneficial for applications requiring broad multicast reception without explicit joins, such as network troubleshooting tools. Additionally, promiscuous mode can be enabled with ifconfig eth0 promisc, which configures the interface to capture all incoming packets, including unicast, broadcast, and multicast traffic not addressed to it, ideal for packet monitoring and analysis. The -promisc option disables this mode to restore normal operation.
These settings support key use cases in networking. Broadcast configuration facilitates protocols that rely on network-wide announcements, while multicast features enable efficient one-to-many data distribution, such as in IPTV streaming where a single video stream is delivered to multiple viewers over IP multicast to conserve bandwidth. Similarly, enabling multicast reception aids service discovery protocols like Multicast DNS (mDNS), which uses multicast to resolve hostnames and locate services on local networks without a central DNS server.
When displaying interface status with ifconfig, relevant flags indicate the active settings: BROADCAST appears if the interface supports broadcasting and the flag is set, confirming the ability to handle broadcast traffic. The MULTICAST flag denotes general multicast support on the interface, while ALLMULTI specifically shows if all-multicast mode is enabled. The PROMISC flag is present when promiscuous mode is active, signaling capture of all network packets. These indicators provide a quick verification of the configured broadcast and multicast capabilities.

Deprecation and Modern Alternatives

Reasons for Deprecation

The iproute2 suite was introduced in Linux 2.2 in January 1999 by Alexey Kuznetsov to address the growing limitations of the older net-tools package, including ifconfig, in handling advanced Linux networking features as the kernel evolved. Kuznetsov's development focused on supporting policy-based routing, quality of service (QoS) mechanisms, and other capabilities that ifconfig could not adequately manage, particularly with the advent of IPv6 and complex network topologies.
Key technical shortcomings of ifconfig contributed to its deprecation, as it lacked native support for IPv6 policy routing, which requires fine-grained control over routing decisions based on source addresses, protocols, or other packet attributesfeatures integral to modern networks but absent in net-tools. Additionally, ifconfig provided only rudimentary QoS support, unable to leverage the Linux kernel's advanced traffic control (tc) subsystems for shaping, policing, or prioritization, limiting its utility in bandwidth-managed environments. Its synchronous nature often led to command hangs during interface operations if the kernel was under load or encountered issues, such as during boot or high-traffic scenarios, blocking user sessions without timeout mechanisms. Error reporting was another weakness, with ifconfig offering minimal, often cryptic feedback that failed to detail underlying kernel errors or configuration conflicts, complicating troubleshooting compared to more verbose modern tools.
Design flaws further hastened ifconfig's obsolescence; as a monolithic command, it combined interface configuration, address assignment, and status display into a single utility, lacking the modularity of iproute2's object-oriented approach with specialized subcommands like ip link for link-layer management and ip addr for addressing. This structure made ifconfig inflexible for emerging features, such as native handling of VLAN tagging (via vconfig integration) or bridge configurations, which iproute2 supports directly without external dependencies.
Major Linux distributions began phasing out ifconfig from core installations due to these issues, prioritizing iproute2 for security and maintenance reasons. Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8, released in 2019, excluded net-tools (containing ifconfig) from the base repository, requiring explicit installation for legacy use only. Starting with Ubuntu 18.04 in 2018, net-tools was no longer installed by default in standard images, retained solely as an optional package for compatibility with older scripts. This trend continues in later releases, such as Ubuntu 24.04 (2024) and Red Hat Enterprise Linux 10 (2024), where net-tools is not installed by default and must be explicitly added for use.
Major Linux distributions have deprecated ifconfig in favor of the ip command from iproute2, with net-tools remaining available only as an optional package for legacy support as of 2025.

Replacement with iproute2 Tools

The ip command from the iproute2 suite serves as the primary modern replacement for ifconfig, providing a unified interface for managing network devices, addresses, and links through the Linux kernel's netlink socket mechanism. This object-oriented approach allows for more precise control over networking objects such as addresses (addr), links (link), and routes, surpassing the limitations of ifconfig's synchronous ioctl-based operations.
For displaying interface status, ip addr show (or simply ip a) lists all network interfaces with their IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, equivalent to ifconfig -a, but it includes additional details like MTU, flags, and statistics without requiring separate invocations for inactive devices. To assign an IP address, the command ip addr add 192.168.1.10/24 dev eth0 adds a static IPv4 address with subnet mask to the specified interface, supporting both temporary and persistent configurations via scripting or system files. Similarly, ip addr del 192.168.1.10/24 dev eth0 removes an address, offering finer control than ifconfig's broadcast or point-to-point modes.
Link management is handled by the ip link subcommand, which activates or deactivates interfaces with ip link set eth0 up or ip link set eth0 down, directly mapping to ifconfig eth0 up or ifconfig eth0 down but with support for additional parameters like MTU adjustments via ip link set eth0 mtu 1500. For MAC address changes, ip link set eth0 address 00:11:22:33:44:55 spoofs or sets the hardware address, a feature not natively available in ifconfig without kernel module interventions. These operations require root privileges and can be combined for batch scripting, enhancing automation in environments like cloud provisioning.
Key advantages of ip over ifconfig include its asynchronous netlink communication, which reduces blocking calls and improves performance in high-throughput scenarios, full native support for IPv6 addressing without legacy workarounds, and extensibility to advanced networking constructs like VXLAN tunnels via dedicated subcommands such as ip link add vxlan0 type vxlan id 42 dev eth0. Additionally, the -j or --json option enables machine-readable JSON output for commands like ip -j addr show, facilitating integration with scripting languages and monitoring tools without parsing human-readable text. This scripting-friendliness, combined with comprehensive error reporting, makes ip ideal for DevOps workflows.
Migration from ifconfig to ip is straightforward, with direct equivalents such as replacing ifconfig eth0 192.168.1.10 netmask 255.255.255.0 up with ip addr add 192.168.1.10/24 dev eth0 followed by ip link set eth0 up; compatibility shims and wrapper scripts are available in distributions like Ubuntu to ease the transition during upgrades. Users can test mappings incrementally, starting with display commands, as ip maintains backward-compatible syntax where possible.
Since the early 2010s, iproute2 has been the default networking toolkit in major Linux distributions, including Ubuntu (phasing out net-tools by default since 2017), Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Fedora, and Debian, rendering ifconfig optional and often uninstalled on minimal systems to reduce package bloat. This widespread adoption reflects its alignment with modern kernel features and the deprecation of legacy net-tools for maintenance reasons.

Related Tools

Legacy net-tools Suite

The net-tools package is a collection of command-line utilities designed to configure and manage the network subsystem of the Linux kernel. It includes key tools such as ifconfig for interface configuration, route for routing table management, arp for address resolution protocol operations, netstat for displaying network connections and statistics, mii-tool for media-independent interface diagnostics, and others like hostname, ipmaddr, iptunnel, nameif, plipconfig, rarp, and slattach. These components were developed in the 1990s as part of the NET-3 networking distribution for early Linux kernels, such as the 2.x series, to provide essential networking controls in user space.
The tools within net-tools exhibit strong interdependencies, where ifconfig is frequently paired with route to establish default gateways and routing policies, and with arp to view or manipulate the ARP cache for IP-to-MAC address mappings. This integration allows administrators to perform comprehensive network setup tasks, such as assigning IP addresses via ifconfig and then adding routes with route to ensure connectivity.
Maintenance of net-tools has been minimal, with the latest upstream release (version 2.10) occurring on January 7, 2021, after which the project has seen occasional patches. Bernd Eckenfels serves as the primary occasional contributor, handling sporadic updates through a Git mirror, though the suite is now considered deprecated in favor of more modern alternatives.
Net-tools is distributed and installed as a single bundle package in most Linux distributions, such as via apt install net-tools on Debian-based systems, ensuring all utilities are available together. Removing the package can disrupt legacy scripts and automation that rely on parsing output from multiple tools like ifconfig and netstat, potentially breaking network monitoring or configuration routines in older environments.
In legacy contexts, net-tools remains essential for older embedded systems and minimal Linux installations that lack space or dependency support for newer toolsets, where its lightweight footprint and compatibility with early kernel versions continue to provide reliable basic networking functions.

Complementary Networking Commands

Several commands complement ifconfig by addressing aspects of network management that extend beyond interface configuration, such as routing, connectivity testing, wireless specifics, and hardware details. These tools often integrate into workflows where ifconfig sets the foundational interface parameters, enabling administrators to verify or enhance network setups on Unix-like systems.
The route command manages the kernel routing table, allowing users to add or delete routes for directing traffic, such as establishing a default gateway with route add default gw 192.168.1.1. Like ifconfig, route is part of the deprecated net-tools suite and has been largely superseded by modern alternatives, though it remains available in many distributions for legacy compatibility.
Ping serves as a diagnostic tool to test network connectivity by sending ICMP echo requests and measuring responses, often used to validate changes made via ifconfig, for instance, by specifying an interface with ping -I eth0 8.8.8.8 to confirm reachability from a particular network device. This helps troubleshoot issues like IP assignment or link status without altering configurations.
For wireless interfaces, iwconfig provides specialized configuration options that ifconfig lacks, such as setting the ESSID for a network with iwconfig wlan0 essid "network", focusing on parameters like signal quality, encryption, and mode that are unique to Wi-Fi hardware. It operates alongside ifconfig to fully manage wireless connections, querying or adjusting attributes specific to 802.11 standards.
Ethtool queries and modifies low-level Ethernet device settings, offering insights into hardware capabilities like link speed, duplex mode, and driver statistics through commands such as ethtool eth0, which reveal details not visible in ifconfig output. This utility is essential for diagnosing physical layer issues or optimizing performance at the driver level.
In practice, these commands form integrated workflows; for static network setups, ifconfig assigns an IP address followed by route to define gateways, ensuring complete routing configuration. For dynamic environments, ifconfig can prepare an interface before invoking dhclient to request DHCP leases, automating address acquisition while route handles any supplementary paths.

References

ifconfig - FreeBSD Manual Pages

ifconfig(8) - Linux manual page - man7.org

ifconfig Command - IBM

Linux networking: ifconfig versus ip - Red Hat

ifconfig(8) - NetBSD Manual Pages

ifconfig(8) - OpenBSD manual pages

Howto install ifconfig on CentOS 7 Linux

How to Fix "ifconfig: Command not Found" on Linux - phoenixNAP

How to Install ifconfig on Debian 12: 4 Possible Methods

Monitoring the Interface Configuration With the ifconfig Command

ifconfig Command - IBM

Can someone please explain ifconfig output in Mac OS X?

Ifconfig - stm32mpu - ST wiki

Linux Network Management: Installing and Using 'ifconfig'

https://www.howtogeek.com/stop-using-these-deprecated-linux-commands/

Where is the statement of deprecation of ifconfig (on linux)?

ifconfig(8)

Twenty Years of Berkeley Unix : From AT&T-Owned to Freely - O'Reilly

 4.2BSD Networking Implementation Notes

Linux Network Administrator's Guide, Second Edition - O'Reilly

Chapter 4. A Detailed History - Debian

Linux Networking-HOWTO (Previously the Net-3 Howto): IP

Moving on from net-tools - LWN.net

how to add multiple ethernet interfaces to linux - Ask Ubuntu

ifconfig(8): configure network interface - Linux man page - Die.net

RHEL network interface dropping packets - Red Hat Customer Portal

10 more essential Linux commands you need to know - Red Hat

NetworkConfiguration - Debian Wiki

Configuring networks - Ubuntu Server documentation

Linux Configure Jumbo Frames to Boost Network Performance ...

7.13. Configuring the network Script - Linux From Scratch!

Linux ifconfig Command With Examples - phoenixNAP

15 Useful ifconfig Commands to Configure Network Interface in Linux

How to Change MAC Address in Linux - Baeldung

MAC Address Spoofing/Changing Software - Server Fault

What Is a MAC Flooding Attack? - JumpCloud

What is MAC Spoofing Attack? - GeeksforGeeks

All About ifconfig

 Cisco IT Case Study IP/TV

RFC 6762 - Multicast DNS - IETF Datatracker

 iputils project - Fosdem

IPROUTE2 Utility Suite Documentation - Policy Routing

networking:iproute2 

System blocks (hangs) on ifconfig up

ifconfig Command not found on CentOS 8 / RHEL 8 - Quick Fix

ifconfig missing after Ubuntu 18.04 install

If you're still using ifconfig, you're living in the past | Ubuntu

How to Use the ip Command in Linux | Linode Docs

ip(8) - Linux manual page - man7.org

networking:net-tools 

net-tools - Project Home

ecki/net-tools: Linux base networking tools - GitHub

Debian -- Details of package net-tools in sid

6 deprecated Linux commands and the tools you should be using ...

Ping using specific gateway interface or source IP address - nixCraft

Linux ping Command with Examples | phoenixNAP KB

iwconfig(8) - Linux man page

How to Configure Wireless on Any Linux Desktop

Monitoring Interfaces and Transceivers Using ethtool - NVIDIA Docs

How to Change Speed/Duplex of Ethernet Card Linux {Ethtool ...

Network Configuration and Troubleshooting using ifconfig ip netstat

Is it possible to use Ifconfig to switch an interface to DHCP and if not ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion