inetd Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
inetd
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 inetd, short for Internet service daemon, is a super-server daemon on many Unix-like operating systems that listens for incoming network connections on designated ports and invokes the appropriate server programs to handle those requests, thereby managing multiple network services efficiently from a single process. Introduced in 4.3 BSD, it serves as a foundational component for providing services such as remote login (rlogin), file transfer (FTP), and other TCP/IP-based protocols by forking and executing server daemons only when a connection is detected, which minimizes idle resource consumption on the host system.
The operation of inetd relies on its configuration file, typically /etc/inetd.conf, where administrators define entries for each service, including the service name, socket type (such as stream for TCP or datagram for UDP), protocol, wait status (to indicate if the server handles one or multiple connections), user context for execution, and the path to the server program along with its arguments. Upon startup, inetd reads this file to bind to the specified ports and continuously monitors for activity; when a connection arrives, it matches it to the corresponding service and launches the handler, often integrating features like TCP wrappers for access control via libwrap. This on-demand invocation model contrasts with standalone daemons that run persistently, making inetd particularly suitable for low-traffic services while allowing high-traffic ones to be migrated to dedicated processes for better performance.
Over time, inetd has been extended with options for debugging, logging, rate limiting to prevent abuse (such as capping invocations per minute per service or IP address), and support for IPv6 and RPC-based services, though modern systems may supplement or replace it with enhanced alternatives like xinetd for added security features or systemd socket activation for containerized environments. Despite these evolutions, inetd remains a core utility in distributions like NetBSD, OpenBSD, and z/OS, underscoring its enduring role in Unix network administration by balancing simplicity, efficiency, and configurability.

Overview

Purpose and Functionality

inetd is the Internet super-server daemon, a system process originally developed as part of BSD Unix that manages incoming network connections by listening on multiple ports and dynamically invoking the appropriate server programs to handle requests, thereby eliminating the need for dedicated daemons for each service. This approach allows a single daemon to multiplex services, supporting protocols such as TCP for stream-oriented connections, UDP for datagram-based interactions, and RPC for remote procedure calls. By operating in a single-threaded manner, inetd uses system calls like select(2) to monitor multiple sockets efficiently without blocking on any one connection.
The primary functionality of inetd centers on resource efficiency, as it binds only to the ports specified in its configuration file and remains idle until an incoming connection triggers activity, forking a child process to service the request while the parent process continues listening. Upon forking, inetd redirects the connection's file descriptortypically as standard input and outputto the invoked server program, processes the request, and then closes the socket once the child exits, minimizing memory and CPU overhead compared to continuously running multiple listening daemons. This on-demand invocation reduces overall system load, particularly on resource-constrained environments, by avoiding the persistent resource consumption of idle services.
A typical workflow illustrates this process: for instance, when configured to handle Telnet on port 23, inetd listens for TCP connections on that port; upon receiving one, it forks and executes the server binary such as /usr/sbin/in.telnetd, passing the socket as the child's standard input and output streams to facilitate the interactive session. inetd first appeared in 4.3BSD as an efficient alternative to separate per-service daemons.

Historical Development

inetd was first introduced in 1986 as part of the 4.3BSD release developed by the University of California, Berkeley's Computer Systems Research Group, integrating with the emerging BSD socket API to enable efficient management of network services on Unix systems. The daemon, authored by Phil Lapsley during his work on the Berkeley UNIX project, addressed the need to reduce resource overhead by consolidating multiple port listeners into a single process rather than running dedicated daemons for each service. From its inception, inetd incorporated logging capabilities via integration with syslog for monitoring service invocations and errors, a feature that persisted across subsequent implementations.
The tool evolved through later BSD releases, with 4.4BSD (released in 1993) introducing enhancements such as built-in support for TCPMUX multiplexing on port 1 and improved handling of ONC RPC-based services, modeled after SunOS 4.1 to better accommodate remote procedure calls over UDP and TCP. In parallel, inetd was ported to System V Unix variants in the late 1980s, notably through SVR4 (1989), where it became a standard component for service management, with configuration files adapted to paths like /etc/inet/inetd.conf for compatibility.
Key milestones in inetd's adoption included its integration into early Linux distributions in the early 1990s, where it served as the primary super-server alongside precursors to more secure alternatives like xinetd, developed in 1992 to address vulnerabilities in the original. Widely adopted in POSIX-compliant Unix-like environments, inetd saw adaptations for IPv6 support added in the late 1990s by the KAME project, enabling dual-stack operation in modern BSD derivatives. However, by the post-2000 period, its usage declined significantly as system administrators favored always-on, dedicated services for performance and security reasons, particularly with the rise of high-bandwidth networks and tools offering finer-grained access controls.

Implementation

Core Mechanisms

Inetd begins by parsing its configuration file, typically /etc/inetd.conf, upon startup to determine the services it will manage. The file's syntax consists of tab- or space-separated fields: service name (from /etc/services), socket type (e.g., stream or dgram), protocol (e.g., tcp or udp), wait/nowait flag, user to run as, server path, and arguments. For RPC services, the protocol field uses rpc/tcp or rpc/udp followed by version numbers, integrating with rpcbind (formerly portmap) to dynamically map ports. Configuration is reloaded when inetd receives a SIGHUP signal, allowing runtime updates without restarting the daemon.
At runtime, inetd employs the select() system call to multiplex monitoring across all configured sockets, efficiently waiting for incoming connections or datagrams without blocking on individual ports. Upon detecting activity on a socket, inetd accepts the connection for stream protocols like TCP or receives the datagram for UDP. The started server process can use getpeername() on the passed socket to retrieve the client's address and port for logging or access control purposes, such as with TCP wrappers. The socket file descriptor is duplicated to the standard input, output, and error streams (using dup2()) of the child process, enabling the server to communicate directly over the network. Finally, inetd forks a child process and executes the server binary via execve(), passing any configured arguments; the parent then resumes monitoring.
Resource management in inetd emphasizes efficiency and stability for low-traffic services. File descriptors are carefully handled to avoid leaks, with the accepted socket passed exclusively to the child while the parent closes unnecessary ones post-fork. Concurrent invocation limits mitigate denial-of-service risks; by default, no service exceeds 256 starts per minute globally (configurable via the -R option), with temporary blacklisting on violation.
Protocol-specific behaviors optimize handling based on transport characteristics. For TCP stream sockets, inetd supports full-duplex connections in "nowait" mode, forking a new process per incoming connection to manage concurrent clients independently. In contrast, UDP datagram sockets default to "wait" mode, where a single server process handles multiple packets sequentially on the shared socket without forking per datagram, as the server must read at least one datagram before returning control to inetd. "Nowait" UDP is possible but rare, forking per request at the risk of resource exhaustion. RPC integration leverages portmap to register services dynamically, with inetd invoking the server only after port allocation confirmation.

Configuration Process

On Unix-like systems, inetd is typically available as part of the base installation in most distributions, such as FreeBSD and NetBSD, where it is included by default without additional packages. In Debian-based systems like Ubuntu, it can be installed via the package manager using apt install openbsd-inetd, which provides the OpenBSD implementation with support for IPv6 and libwrap access control. If compilation from source is required, such as for custom builds, inetd can be obtained from OpenBSD or NetBSD sources and compiled with dependencies including the libwrap library for TCP wrapper integration, using standard configure and make processes.
To start inetd as a daemon, use the init script with /etc/init.d/inetd start on SysV-init systems or systemctl start openbsd-inetd (or inetd depending on the package) on systemd-based distributions like modern Debian or Red Hat derivatives. Command-line options include -d to enable debug mode for troubleshooting, which causes inetd to run in the foreground and log detailed output to stderr.
Initial configuration involves editing the /etc/inetd.conf file, which consists of lines specifying services in a tab- or space-separated format across seven columns: service name (from /etc/services), socket type (e.g., stream for TCP or dgram for UDP), protocol (e.g., tcp or udp), wait/nowait flag (indicating single or multiple connections), user (and optional group) to run the server as, server program path, and program arguments. For example:
ftp stream tcp nowait root /usr/sbin/in.ftpd in.ftpd -l -a
Comments begin with #, and blank lines are ignored. After modifications, reload the configuration without restarting by sending a SIGHUP signal to the inetd process using kill -HUP $(cat /var/run/inetd.pid) or equivalent.
Platform variations exist in configuration and management. On Linux systems, extended versions like xinetd are common, using /etc/xinetd.conf for global settings and /etc/xinetd.d/ for per-service files, with reloading via systemctl reload xinetd. In contrast, BSD systems like FreeBSD use the standard /etc/inetd.conf directly, with enabling/disabling at boot controlled by setting inetd_enable="YES" in /etc/rc.conf. On Linux, enabling inetd for boot via SysV tools uses chkconfig inetd on, though systemd handles this natively post-installation.

Usage and Services

Defining Services

Services in inetd are defined through entries in the configuration file /etc/inetd.conf, where each line specifies how inetd should handle incoming connections for a particular network service. The standard syntax for a service entry consists of several whitespace-separated fields: service-name socket-type protocol {wait|nowait} user server-program . The service-name field identifies the service, typically by its official name from /etc/services (e.g., telnet for port 23) or a decimal port number for non-standard ports; for RPC-based services, it uses the format rpc-service/version from /etc/rpc. The socket-type is either stream (connection-oriented, like TCP) or dgram (connectionless, like UDP), while the protocol specifies the transport layer, such as tcp, udp, rpc/tcp, or rpc/udp. The wait or nowait flag controls concurrency: wait means inetd handles one connection at a time for that service (common for datagram protocols to avoid overwhelming the server), whereas nowait allows multiple simultaneous instances (typical for stream protocols); optional limits like /max-child can cap the number of child processes. The user field sets the privileges under which the server runs (e.g., root or nobody:daemon for security), and server-program provides the path to the executable binary or internal for built-in services like echo or daytime; any trailing arguments are passed to the program.
To create a custom service, first ensure the server binary is installed and executable by the specified user, then add a new line to /etc/inetd.conf using a non-standard port number in the service-name field (e.g., 12345 for a custom port). For instance, to handle a custom echo server on port 12345 via TCP, the entry would be 12345 stream tcp nowait (/page/Root) /usr/local/bin/custom_echo. Arguments can be appended, such as 12345 stream tcp nowait (/page/Root) /usr/local/bin/custom_echo -v -logfile=/var/log/echo.log, to enable verbose output or logging. Environment variables are inherited from inetd but can be set explicitly in the server program if needed; logging options depend on the server's implementation, often directing output to syslog via standard error. After editing, reload the configuration with a SIGHUP signal to inetd (e.g., kill -HUP $(cat /var/run/inetd.pid)). For internal services versus external binaries, built-in options like internal invoke lightweight handlers without forking external processes, while external binaries allow full customization but incur higher overhead from execve calls.
Examples illustrate practical configurations. For the daytime service over UDP, a common entry is daytime dgram udp wait (/page/Root) internal, where inetd's built-in handler responds with the current date and time without launching an external program. For an RPC-based service like mountd (used in NFS), it might be mountd/1-2 dgram rpc/udp wait (/page/Root) /usr/libexec/rpc.mountd rpc.mountd, specifying the RPC program name and version range, with the server binary handling NFS mount requests. In contrast, a telnet service using TCP wrappers for access control is telnet stream tcp nowait (/page/Root) /usr/sbin/tcpd in.(/page/Telnet)d, where /usr/sbin/tcpd acts as a proxy to log and filter connections before invoking the actual in.(/page/Telnet)d binary.
Testing and debugging service definitions involves verifying that inetd is listening on the intended ports and tracing execution for issues. Use (/page/Netstat) -an | (/page/Grep) LISTEN (or (/page/.ss) -tuln on modern systems) to confirm the port is bound, such as seeing 0.0.0.0:12345 in the output for a custom TCP service; if absent, check for syntax errors in /etc/inetd.conf or binding conflicts. For deeper tracing, attach (/page/Strace) -f -p $(pidof inetd) to monitor forks and execs when a connection arrives, revealing failures like missing binaries or signal handling. Common pitfalls include permission errors, where the server binary lacks execute rights for the specified user (e.g., setuid issues for root), or incorrect wait/nowait flags leading to connection refusals under load; always test with tools like (/page/Telnet) <host> <port> or nc -u <host> <port> to simulate traffic.

Integration with System Services

Inetd integrates with system logging facilities primarily through the syslog protocol, enabling the recording of connection attempts, errors, and authentication events for monitoring and auditing purposes. When invoked with the -l option, inetd activates logging for connections handled via libwrap, directing messages to the system logger for detailed tracking of incoming requests. Authentication-related events, such as failed logins for services spawned by inetd, are typically routed to /var/log/secure under configurations common in Linux distributions, where syslog rules direct authpriv priority messages to this file for secure event consolidation. This integration allows administrators to centralize logs from multiple services without requiring individual daemons to implement separate logging mechanisms.
For enhanced access control, inetd supports compatibility with TCP Wrappers through the libwrap library, which provides host-based filtering without necessitating an external intermediary like /usr/sbin/tcpd in modern implementations. In implementations like NetBSD, services defined in /etc/inetd.conf can leverage libwrap by enabling the -l flag (noting that flag behavior, such as enabling wrapping versus logging, may vary by operating system), allowing inetd to consult /etc/hosts.allow and /etc/hosts.deny files to permit or deny connections based on client IP addresses or hostnames before spawning the target process. This setup is particularly useful for wrapping lightweight services, where the example configuration might specify a service argument that invokes libwrap checks inline, ensuring granular control over network access while maintaining inetd's resource efficiency. Logging of these access decisions also feeds into syslog, often appearing in /var/log/secure for audit trails.
In handling legacy network protocols, inetd plays a key role by dynamically spawning daemons for infrequently used services, such as FTP for file transfers, POP3 for mail retrieval, and IMAP for mailbox access, where dedicated always-on servers might be unnecessary. For instance, POP3 can be configured in /etc/inetd.conf to invoke a server like cucipop on port 110/tcp, allowing on-demand activation without persistent resource consumption. Similarly, FTP and IMAP entries enable inetd to listen on their respective ports (21/tcp and 143/tcp) and launch appropriate handlers like ftpd or imapd upon connection, supporting environments where these protocols remain in use alongside modern alternatives. This approach reduces overhead for optional daemons in legacy setups.
Inetd also coordinates with RPC mechanisms for services like NFS, where it can manage RPC-based protocols by specifying rpc/tcp or rpc/udp in service definitions, allowing it to interact with portmap or rpcbind for dynamic port mapping. RPC servers register their ports with rpcbind upon startup, and inetd facilitates this by spawning RPC daemons on demand, ensuring that NFS mount requests or other RPC calls resolve correctly through the portmapper's coordination on port 111. This integration is essential for legacy RPC environments, where inetd bridges the gap between static port assignments and dynamic service invocation.
Regarding broader system integration, inetd can be deployed in containerized environments to support lightweight services, where its low footprint enables multiplexing multiple network listeners within a single container without heavy orchestration. Additionally, inetd ties into traditional init systems for automated startup; under SysV init, it is managed via scripts in /etc/init.d/inetd that handle start, stop, and restart operations during boot sequences. These integrations ensure inetd's seamless operation within diverse system bootstrapping frameworks.

Alternatives and Evolution

Modern Replacements

As network services evolved in the late 1990s and 2000s, inetd's original design faced challenges in handling modern workloads, prompting the development of more robust superservers that addressed scalability issues, such as limited concurrency handling, and security shortcomings, like the absence of per-service access controls and rate limits. These limitations often led administrators to favor always-running daemons, such as sshd, which could maintain persistent connections without the overhead of repeated forking. Key replacements emerged to provide on-demand service activation while incorporating advanced features for better resource management and protection against abuse.
One prominent successor is xinetd, an extended Internet services daemon initially developed by Rob Braun in 1998 as a secure enhancement to inetd. Released publicly around 1999, although its last release was version 2.3.15 in 2012, xinetd introduces access control lists (ACLs) via directives like only_from and no_access to restrict connections by IP address or hostname ranges, as well as rate limiting through per_source for concurrent connections per client and cps for overall connection-per-second thresholds. These capabilities allow finer-grained policy enforcement per service, mitigating risks from denial-of-service attempts that inetd could not handle effectively. Migration from inetd typically involves converting the single-file /etc/inetd.conf format to xinetd's stanza-based configuration in /etc/xinetd.conf or service-specific files in /etc/xinetd.d/, often using tools like the provided itox script for automated translation.
In the 2010s, systemd's socket activation mechanism further advanced on-demand service management, integrating it into a comprehensive init system for Linux distributions. Introduced as a core feature in early systemd versions around 2010, socket units (.socket files) enable parallelized or per-connection activation, where systemd listens on specified ports and passes activated file descriptors to corresponding service units via StandardInput=socket. For instance, socket units like sshd.socket with ListenStream=22 and Accept=yes replicate inetd's per-connection spawning but with systemd's dependency resolution and logging. Specific enhancements appeared in version 38 (released in 2011), which refined socket handling for broader adoption. Migration guides recommend creating paired .socket and @.service units from inetd entriesfor example, transforming an SSH inetd line into a socket unit that invokes sshd -ifollowed by enabling via systemctl enable <service>.socket.
Other alternatives include ucspi-tcp, a minimal UNIX Client-Server Program Interface (UCSPI) implementation by Daniel J. Bernstein, featuring tcpserver as a lightweight superserver that enforces concurrency limits (defaulting to 40 connections) and fast TCP access controls using cdb databases for efficient rule evaluation across thousands of hosts. On macOS, launchd serves as the primary service manager since 2005, using plist-based configuration (XML property lists) to handle on-demand activation via the inetdCompatibility key, which launches instances per incoming socket much like inetd, with support for inactivity-based shutdowns. OpenBSD's inetd implementation, while retaining the classic superserver role, supports platform-specific security through features like running services as non-root users and rate limiting; services launched by inetd can additionally leverage the system's pledge and unveil mechanisms for restricting privileges, though chroot is typically applied at the service level rather than built into the daemon itself. These tools collectively addressed inetd's decline by prioritizing secure, scalable activation in diverse environments.

Comparative Advantages

Inetd excels in scenarios requiring minimal resource consumption during idle periods, operating as a single lightweight process that listens for incoming connections across multiple ports without spawning dedicated daemons for infrequently used services. This contrasts with xinetd, which, while also on-demand, introduces additional overhead through its more sophisticated configuration and feature set, such as rate limiting via the cps directive that caps connections per second to prevent overload, though this increases administrative complexity for setup and maintenance. Systemd's socket activation offers a hybrid advantage with zero-downtime capabilities through pre-forking in its parallelization mode, where services are started at boot for high-frequency use cases, reducing activation latency compared to inetd's per-connection spawning, but at the cost of always-on resource allocation for those services.
In terms of features, inetd provides basic socket passing but lacks advanced controls like built-in connection rate limiting, which xinetd addresses with attributes such as cps = 25 30 to retire a service temporarily after exceeding thresholds, effectively mitigating denial-of-service attempts. Similarly, inetd does not natively include per-source connection limits, a capability xinetd enforces via per_source to restrict simultaneous connections from individual IPs, enhancing fairness under load. For per-IP bans, systemd socket activation integrates seamlessly with tools like fail2ban, allowing dynamic firewall rules based on log patterns without native built-in ACLs in the activation mechanism itself. While modern implementations of inetd support IPv6 through dual-stack configurations, it often requires explicit protocol specification in service definitions, unlike xinetd and systemd, which handle IPv6 more transparently in their configurations.
Inetd remains ideal for low-traffic legacy environments, such as embedded routers or systems with rare services like occasional SSH access (typically ~1 connection per hour), where its simplicity and negligible idle footprint outweigh the need for advanced features. Replacements like xinetd and systemd are preferable for high-load servers, such as cloud infrastructures, where xinetd's resource management prevents crashes under bursts and systemd's integration enables scalable, on-demand scaling without per-connection overhead. Hybrid approaches, such as deploying inetd solely for infrequently invoked services while using systemd for core operations, balance efficiency and modernity in mixed environments.

Security Considerations

Known Vulnerabilities

Inetd's fork-per-connection model exposes it to resource exhaustion attacks, where an attacker floods the system with rapid incoming connections, causing inetd to repeatedly fork child processes until system limits on processes or memory are reached, effectively creating a fork bomb-like denial-of-service (DoS) condition. This vulnerability stems from inetd's design, which invokes a new process for each accepted connection without inherent rate limiting, allowing even modest connection volumes to overwhelm low-resource systems. Historical incidents, such as the Red Hat Linux 6.2 inetd bug (CVE-2001-0309), demonstrated this risk, where failure to close sockets for internal services like chargen enabled remote attackers to exhaust file descriptors and halt all network services.
Privilege escalation risks arise from inetd's default operation as root, which executes spawned services with elevated privileges unless explicitly configured otherwise via setuid or chroot options. This allows vulnerabilities in any serviced daemon to potentially grant attackers root access, as seen in cases where misconfigured or buggy services inherit root context. For instance, in nowait mode for TCP services, multiple concurrent instances can run without synchronization, amplifying DoS potential if a service consumes excessive resources per invocation, though this mode was intended for high-throughput scenarios. Pre-2000 implementations lacked robust checks, enabling UDP-based DoS through amplification in services like echo or daytime, where spoofed packets triggered oversized responses that saturated bandwidth.
RPC services managed by inetd, such as those registered via portmap (rpcbind), have been prone to exploits due to weak authentication and buffer handling in 1990s implementations. On SunOS systems, portmap vulnerabilities allowed remote code execution or information disclosure by querying or relaying RPC calls without validation, often leading to full system compromise when inetd spawned the affected daemon. A prominent example is the ToolTalk database server (rpc.ttdbserverd), vulnerable to buffer overflows (CVE-1999-0003) that enabled arbitrary command execution as root when invoked by inetd for RPC requests. These flaws were widespread in Unix variants, with attackers using tools like rpcinfo to enumerate and target exposed services.
Inetd lacks native encryption support, transmitting service data in cleartext and exposing credentials or sessions to network sniffing attacks, particularly for protocols like telnet or FTP historically managed via inetd. Early IPv6 implementations introduced bypass risks; for example, in IRIX 6.5.19 (CVE-2003-0472), IPv6-enabled inetd could hang during port scans, allowing DoS while IPv4 traffic continued unaffected, highlighting incomplete dual-stack handling in pre-2010s versions. In the early 2010s, partial IPv6 support in distributions like FreeBSD and Linux inetd permitted attackers to evade IPv4-only firewalls by tunneling exploits over IPv6 sockets.

Mitigation Strategies

To secure inetd deployments, administrators can implement access controls to restrict incoming connections and isolate service processes. TCP Wrappers provide host-based access control by configuring the /usr/sbin/tcpd binary as the server executable in /etc/inetd.conf, followed by the actual service daemon; this enables rules in /etc/hosts.allow and /etc/hosts.deny to permit or deny connections based on client IP addresses, hostnames, or domains, while also facilitating logging of access attempts. For enhanced isolation, chroot jails can be applied to child processes spawned by inetd using wrapper scripts specified in the inetd configuration; these scripts invoke chroot to a restricted directory containing only necessary files and libraries for the service, preventing escapes to the broader filesystem if a service is compromised.
Runtime protections further limit potential abuse by capping resources and optimizing service handling. Per-service resource limits, such as CPU time or file descriptors, can be enforced via wrapper scripts in /etc/inetd.conf that set ulimit values before executing the target daemon, thereby mitigating denial-of-service risks like fork bombs from excessive process creation. Disabling unnecessary services in /etc/inetd.conf by commenting out or removing their entries reduces the attack surface, and the nowait option should be used exclusively for stateless protocols (e.g., daytime or echo) to avoid blocking inetd on long-running connections, while wait is reserved for stateful ones like telnet.
Monitoring and timely updates are essential for detecting and addressing threats. Integrating inetd with the Linux Audit Daemon (auditd) allows logging of relevant system calls, such as process executions or file accesses related to inetd-spawned services, through rules in /etc/audit/audit.rules that track events like execve for /usr/sbin/inetd; this provides an audit trail for forensic analysis. Patches like OpenBSD's setproctitle implementation, ported to other systems, obscure sensitive command-line arguments in process listings (e.g., via ps), preventing information leakage about service configurations. Additionally, firewall rules using tools like iptables can restrict access to inetd-managed ports, for example, by allowing only trusted source IPs: iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 23 -s 192.168.1.0/24 -j ACCEPT; iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 23 -j DROP.
Best practices emphasize minimizing privileges and modernizing deployments. Inetd should be configured to run services under non-root users via the user field in /etc/inetd.conf or setuid wrappers, ensuring that compromised services lack elevated access; for instance, specify nobody or a dedicated user for low-privilege daemons. High-risk services like telnet should be migrated to secure alternatives such as SSH, which provides encryption and authentication, by disabling the telnet entry in inetd.conf and deploying sshd in standalone mode. In secure setups, individual high-traffic services can be run in standalone mode (e.g., via init scripts or systemd) rather than through inetd, avoiding the super-server's overhead and potential single point of failure.

References

https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/trusty/man8/inetd.8.html

inetd linux command man page

Chapter 25. The Internet Super Server inetd

inetd daemon - Provide service management for networks - IBM

inetd internet super-server - Ubuntu Manpage

The inetd Super-Server

inetd Daemon - IBM

What is inetd - MVPS.net

 An Advanced 4.3BSD Interprocess Communication Tutorial

Phil Lapsley - Giganews

inetd(8) - FreeBSD Manual Pages

An Advanced 4.4BSD Interprocess Communication Tutorial

inetd.conf

systemd for Administrators, Part XI

Modern inetd in FreeBSD - Klara Systems

inetd

inetd Daemon (Programming Interfaces Guide)

https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=inetd&sektion=8

inetd(8) - NetBSD Manual Pages

Debian -- Details of package openbsd-inetd in sid

How to restart inetd service in Linux - Kernel Talks

inetd(8) openbsd-inetd Debian bullseye Debian Manpages

inetd.conf File Format for TCP/IP - IBM

Configuring the inetd daemon - IBM

17.4. xinetd Configuration Files | Red Hat Enterprise Linux | 4

25.2 The inetd Super-Server

chkconfig - Linux Manpages Online - man.cx manual pages

inetd.conf(5) - NetBSD Manual Pages

inetd.conf(5)

https://man.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=netstat&sektion=1

https://man.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=strace&sektion=1

inetd.conf(5)

Chapter 17. TCP Wrappers and xinetd - Red Hat Documentation

10.3. Internet/Intranet applications - The Linux Documentation Project

inetd(8) - OpenBSD manual pages

The RPC Portmapper - The Linux Documentation Project

Docker container won't start xinetd (for livestatus) - Troubleshooting

Linux: How to write a System V init script to start, stop, and restart my ...

Weekend Project: Replace Inetd with Xinetd for Better Network ...

xinetd is a secure replacement for inetd - GitHub

systemd.socket - Freedesktop.org

Socket Activation - systemd for Developers I

ucspi-tcp

Creating Launch Daemons and Agents - Apple Developer

https://man.openbsd.org/inetd.8

Xinetd primer - everything you need to know - Comparitech

AUR (en) - openssh-socket-activation - Arch Linux

inetd Internet Services Daemon (IPv6 Administration Guide)

 Async-fork: Mitigating Query Latency Spikes Incurred by the Fork ...

CVE-2001-0309 Detail - NVD

Security considerations for INETD server on IBM i

CVE-1999-0003 Detail - NVD

CVE-2003-0472 - NVD

Combining chroot and xinetd - Dhaval Kapil

https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=inetd.conf&sektion=5

Package: openbsd-inetd - Debian Sources
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion