ISO 10303 Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
ISO 10303
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 ISO 10303, commonly known as STEP (STandard for the Exchange of Product model data), is an international standard series developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) that specifies the computer-interpretable representation of industrial product information and the mechanisms for its exchange between different computer systems. It supports the full product lifecycle, encompassing design, manufacturing, assembly, testing, maintenance, and disposal, by providing a neutral, computer-readable format for product model data that avoids proprietary dependencies.
The development of ISO 10303 originated in 1984 within ISO Technical Committee 184, Subcommittee 4 (Industrial automation systems and integration), as an effort to unify earlier national and international data exchange standards like IGES and VDAFS into a comprehensive, extensible framework. The first parts were published in 1994, with ongoing revisions to incorporate advancements in digital technologies. The standard is organized into over 100 parts, including integrated resources (parts 4099) that define generic data elements for product modeling, application protocols (parts 200299 and beyond) such as AP203 for configuration-controlled 3D product designs and AP214 for automotive mechanical design, conformance testing methodologies (parts 500599), and implementation methods like the clear-text STEP file format in ISO 10303-21. Data modeling is achieved using the EXPRESS information modeling language (ISO 10303-11), enabling precise schemas for geometric, topological, and functional representations.
ISO 10303 plays a critical role in addressing data interoperability challenges in manufacturing, estimated to cost the global economy billions annually due to incompatible systems, by enabling seamless data sharing across CAD, CAM, CAE, and product lifecycle management (PLM) tools. It is widely adopted in industries including aerospace, automotive, shipbuilding, and consumer electronics, with major software vendors supporting its application protocols for 3D model exchange and long-term archiving. Recent enhancements, such as the 2025 release of AP242 edition 4, introduce support for globally unique identifiers (GUIDs), hybrid surface-solid modeling, and semantic product manufacturing information (PMI), facilitating advanced applications in digital twins and smart manufacturing. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) continues to lead development efforts, providing tools like the STEP File Analyzer for validation and promoting its integration into supply chain ecosystems.

Introduction

Definition and Purpose

ISO 10303 is an international standard developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) that defines a family of over 100 parts for the computer-interpretable representation and exchange of product model data (PMD). This data encompasses a wide range of industrial and engineering information, including geometry, topology, materials properties, and manufacturing details, enabling precise and unambiguous descriptions of products. Informally known as STEP, which stands for STandard for the Exchange of Product model data, ISO 10303 was initiated in 1984 to address the limitations of earlier formats.
STEP evolved from predecessors such as the Initial Graphics Exchange Specification (IGES), which primarily focused on exchanging geometric data between computer-aided design (CAD) systems but struggled with broader product information and interoperability issues. Unlike IGES, which often resulted in data loss or inconsistencies during translation, ISO 10303 provides a more comprehensive and extensible framework to support the full spectrum of product data needs in modern engineering environments.
The primary purpose of ISO 10303 is to enable neutral data exchange between heterogeneous CAD, computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), and computer-aided engineering (CAE) systems, minimizing information loss and facilitating seamless collaboration across diverse software platforms. By offering a vendor-independent format, it supports product lifecycle management from initial design through manufacturing, maintenance, and eventual disposal, ensuring data integrity over time. Core to its design is the provision for both file-based exchanges and integration into shared databases or repositories, promoting long-term data archiving and reuse without reliance on proprietary tools.

Scope and Objectives

ISO 10303 encompasses a wide range of product data, including 3D geometry representations such as boundary representation (B-rep) and constructive solid geometry (CSG), assemblies and configurations of mechanical parts, geometric dimensioning and tolerancing (GD&T), material properties, manufacturing processes, and product lifecycle information through Application Protocol 239 (AP239) for product life cycle support (PLCS). It supports data from design through maintenance and disposal but excludes real-time simulation data, focusing instead on static, computer-interpretable representations for exchange and archiving.
The primary objectives of ISO 10303 are to enable vendor-neutral data exchange between disparate computer-aided design (CAD), computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), and product lifecycle management (PLM) systems, ensuring interoperability across industrial supply chains. It also aims to facilitate long-term archiving of product data, as specified in Application Protocol 242 (AP242) edition 4 (2025) for managed model-based 3D engineering, and to support integration throughout the supply chain by providing standardized schemas that can be extended for emerging technologies, such as additive manufacturing via modules like ISO/TS 10303-1835.
Key principles underlying ISO 10303 include extensibility through modular integrated resources and application modules, which allow for the reuse and adaptation of schemas across different application protocols without altering core definitions. It incorporates conformance classes to permit partial implementations tailored to specific needs, ensuring reliable data exchange while accommodating varying levels of complexity. Additionally, it provides mechanisms for annotating product manufacturing information (PMI), such as dimensions, tolerances, and surface finishes directly on 3D models, enhancing usability in downstream processes like inspection and fabrication.
Unlike simple file formats focused solely on geometry export, ISO 10303 emphasizes semantic richness by capturing not only shapes but also relationships, constraints, and contextual metadata, enabling a complete and unambiguous product definition suitable for automated processing and analysis. This approach, modeled using the EXPRESS information modeling language, supports the creation of extensible, application-specific protocols while maintaining neutrality across systems.

History

Origins and Early Development

The development of ISO 10303, known as STEP (Standard for the Exchange of Product model data), originated in the early 1980s amid growing frustrations with existing fragmented standards for exchanging computer-aided design (CAD) data, particularly in the aerospace and automotive industries where reliable interoperability was essential for collaborative manufacturing. These industries relied on proprietary formats and early exchange protocols like IGES (Initial Graphics Exchange Specification, developed in 1979 under the U.S. Air Force's ICAM program), SET (Standard d'Echange et de Transfert, initiated in France in 1983), and VDA-FS (Verband der Automobilindustrie Surface Interface, released in Germany in 1982), which often resulted in incomplete or lossy data transfers due to their focus on geometry rather than comprehensive product information. To address these limitations, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Technical Committee 184 on Industrial Automation Systems and Integration formed Subcommittee 4 (SC4) in December 1983, with its first meeting in July 1984 at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Washington, DC, explicitly aiming to create a successor standard for neutral, computer-interpretable product data exchange across the full product lifecycle.
Early development efforts were marked by extensive international collaboration, involving approximately 400 experts from 28 countries (17 participating members and 11 observers) under ISO TC184/SC4, which coordinated inputs from national initiatives to harmonize global requirements. In the United States, the Product Data Exchange Specification (PDES) project, initiated in May 1984 by the U.S. Department of Defense and led by NIST, served as a foundational effort, shifting from IGES's parametric approach to formal information modeling for broader automation support; PDES reports issued in July 1984 outlined requirements for integrated product data, influencing the international scope. Preliminary work on the EXPRESS modeling language began in the late 1980s, evolving from earlier prototypes like DSL under the USAF-funded Product Definition Data Interface (PDDI) program and NIST's PDES extensions, with the first EXPRESS specifications published in PDES drafts by 1988 to enable precise, schema-based representations. This language was mandated for normative models in STEP, addressing the need for a mechanism-independent format that avoided vendor-specific dependencies.
Key challenges during this phase included significant data loss during translations between systems, exacerbated by proprietary formats and the lack of standardized semantics in predecessors like IGES, which generated large files with ambiguous "flavorings" and incomplete lifecycle coverage. These issues prompted a focus on integrated resourcesreusable, generic modelsto ensure data integrity and extensibility. By 1990, initial working drafts emerged, building on the "Tokyo Draft" of 1988, which incorporated EXPRESS-based models for product information. A pivotal milestone came in 1988 when STEP's viability was demonstrated at an ISO plenary session, securing approval as an official ISO project and emphasizing a neutral representation decoupled from specific implementation methods, setting the stage for standardized application protocols.

Key Milestones

The development of ISO 10303 reached a significant milestone in 1994 with the publication of its initial parts, marking the first official release of the standard after years of preparatory work. These foundational components included Part 1, providing an overview and fundamental principles of product data representation and exchange; Part 11, defining the EXPRESS language reference manual for describing product information models; and Part 21, specifying the clear text encoding of the exchange structure known as the STEP-file format. Additionally, the first application protocol, AP203 for configuration-controlled 3D designs of mechanical parts and assemblies, was standardized, enabling initial interoperability in mechanical engineering data exchange.
During the 2000s, ISO 10303 expanded substantially, growing from around 40 parts in the early decade to over 50 by the mid-2000s, reflecting broader adoption across industries. Key developments included the publication of AP214 in 2001, which addressed core data for automotive mechanical design processes, supporting assembly structures, product definition, and geometric representation. Similarly, AP239, the application protocol for product life cycle support (PLCS), was released in 2005, facilitating the exchange of maintenance, logistics, and sustainment information throughout a product's lifecycle. Integrated resources for foundational elements were also advanced, with Part 42 on geometric and topological representation updated in 2000 to enhance shape modeling capabilities, and Part 43 on representation structures revised in the same year to support hierarchical product descriptions.
In 2010, further progress was made with the initiation of AP242, aimed at managed model-based 3D engineering, which sought to consolidate and extend capabilities from prior protocols like AP203 and AP214 for comprehensive product lifecycle management. Conformance testing methodologies in Part 31, originally introduced in 1994, were refined through ongoing amendments to ensure robust validation of implementations. Likewise, Part 28 on XML representations of EXPRESS schemas and data was finalized in 2007, providing a modern implementation method for web-based data exchange.
By 2012, the standard had grown to over 100 parts, encompassing a wide array of application protocols, integrated resources, and implementation methods. A pivotal advancement during this period was the adoption of a modular architecture, introduced in the early 2000s and fully integrated by the late 2000s, which allowed for more flexible updates and reuse of components across different application domains without overhauling the entire standard. This structure facilitated easier maintenance and expansion, solidifying ISO 10303's role as a comprehensive framework for product data interoperability.

Recent Developments

In 2014, the first edition of ISO 10303-242 (AP242), titled "Managed model based 3D engineering," was published, integrating the functionalities of AP203 Edition 2 and AP214 Edition 3 to enable comprehensive 3D model-based engineering for product data exchange across design, manufacturing, and lifecycle management. This edition introduced support for shape quality modules, product data management harmonization with AP239, and STEP 3D tessellated geometry, facilitating interoperability in mechanical and assembly modeling.
The second edition of AP242 was released in 2020, extending the standard to include electrical design domains while enhancing mechanical aspects such as 3D geometry, product manufacturing information (PMI), composites, and tessellation for improved visualization and validation properties. These updates built on Edition 1 by adding modules for additive manufacturing elements like build orientation and support structures, promoting broader application in advanced engineering workflows. A third edition followed in 2022 as a minor corrective maintenance release.
In 2021, ISO 10303-1, the overview and fundamental principles part of the standard, underwent a second edition revision to provide clearer definitions of product information representation and exchange principles, including refined specifications for architectures, structures, and data methods like the EXPRESS language. This revision emphasized relationships among ISO 10303 parts to support lifecycle data from design through maintenance.
From 2021 to 2025, further advancements included the fourth edition of AP242, published in August 2025 as ISO 10303-242:2025, which incorporated enhancements for additive manufacturing setups, semantic tolerances, improved tessellated models, and point cloud data to better support digital twins and Industry 4.0 applications. Concurrently, the third edition of AP239 (PLCS) was released in October 2024 as ISO 10303-239:2024, enhancing product lifecycle support through simplified XML schemas, improved configuration management, and better interoperability with other STEP application protocols for long-term data retention.
Broader efforts have focused on harmonizing ISO 10303 with ISO 16792 for technical product documentation, enabling consistent digital product definitions in 3D models, and advancing Industry 4.0 interoperability by integrating STEP data with standards like OPC UA for seamless manufacturing system exchanges. These initiatives underscore ISO 10303's role in fostering open, standardized data flows across cyber-physical systems.

Technical Framework

EXPRESS Language

EXPRESS is a formal information modeling language specified in ISO 10303-11, designed to define product data schemas by specifying entities, attributes, rules, and relationships in an unambiguous manner. It serves as the foundational language for ISO 10303 (STEP), enabling the creation of structured models for data exchange, sharing, and long-term archiving across product lifecycle domains. The language was first standardized in 1994 (Version 1) and updated in 2004 (Version 2), incorporating enhancements for extensibility and query capabilities.
Key features of EXPRESS include support for a range of data types such as integers, reals, strings, logicals, entities, selects, and aggregations like sets, lists, and arrays. It allows definition of entity types with explicit, derived, and inverse attributes, facilitating complex relationships without tying to specific implementations. EXPRESS emphasizes constraints through WHERE rules to enforce data integrity and supports multiple inheritance via subtype/supertype mechanisms, enabling hierarchical modeling. Additionally, it includes query expressions, such as SELECT statements, for retrieving and manipulating data populations, and is text-based for human readability while being parsable by computers.
In EXPRESS syntax, schemas are declared to group related definitions, as in SCHEMA example_schema; ... END_SCHEMA;, providing a logical container for the model. Entity types are defined with attributes and optional supertype references; for instance, a basic entity might appear as:
ENTITY point;
 x : REAL;
 y : REAL;
 z : REAL;
END_ENTITY;
This declares a point entity with three real-valued coordinates. Inheritance is specified using SUBTYPE OF, allowing reuse and specialization; an example is:
ENTITY circle
 SUBTYPE OF (ellipse);
 radius : REAL;
WHERE
 radius > 0.0;
END_ENTITY;
Here, circle inherits from ellipse and adds a radius attribute constrained to positive values. Constraints like WHERE rules ensure validity across entity instances, such as verifying geometric properties, while SELECT statements enable type choices, e.g., TYPE shape = SELECT (point, line, (/page/Circle)); END_TYPE;, for polymorphic modeling.
EXPRESS plays a central role in ISO 10303 by enabling the development of application protocols and integrated resources, where schemas define domain-specific entities like PART or SHAPE_REPRESENTATION for product data. Its constraint and query mechanisms support validation of data instances against schemas, promoting extensibility and interoperability without reliance on proprietary tools, thus facilitating reusable models across industries. This structure allows for schema evolution while maintaining backward compatibility in STEP implementations.

Integrated Resources

The Integrated Resources in ISO 10303, comprising Parts 41 through 99, establish a set of modular, domain-specific schemas that serve as foundational building blocks for product data representation. These resources deliver generic models applicable across various engineering domains, such as the fundamentals of product description and support in Part 41, which covers core entities for product identification, properties, and relationships; geometric and topological representation in Part 42, enabling explicit shape modeling through curves, surfaces, and solids; representation structures in Part 43, which organize data into collections for describing product aspects like sets and lists; product structure configuration in Part 44, supporting hierarchical assemblies and version management; and materials in Part 45, defining properties like composition, mechanical characteristics, and environmental conditions. By providing these reusable components, the Integrated Resources ensure consistency and interoperability in product data exchange without domain-specific tailoring.
The structure of the Integrated Resources follows a hierarchical organization, beginning with low-level foundation elementssuch as units, measures, and basic support constructs in Part 41and progressing to higher-level generic resources for complex assemblies and configurations in Parts 44 and beyond. This layering allows resources to be selectively combined, promoting modularity where, for instance, geometric entities from Part 42 can integrate with product structure from Part 44 to model assembled components. Schemas within these parts are expressed in both long-form variants, which explicitly include inherited attributes for detailed implementations, and short-form variants, which simplify definitions by omitting inheritance hierarchies to ease readability and subsetting. Such design facilitates efficient development of translators and databases by enabling developers to reference only necessary subsets.
A core concept of the Integrated Resources is reusability, which minimizes redundancy by defining common elements once for reuse across the ISO 10303 series, thereby reducing maintenance efforts and ensuring semantic consistency in data exchanges. For geometric representation, Part 42 exemplifies this through entities like bspline_curve and surface_of_revolution, which support precise modeling of shapes using curves and surfaces, while also allowing conceptual mappings from boundary representation (B-rep) solids to mesh approximations for applications like rendering. These resources are defined using the EXPRESS modeling language, enabling formal specification of constraints and relationships.
Over successive editions, the Integrated Resources have evolved to address advancing technologies, with updates incorporating enhanced support for Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines (NURBS) in Part 42 for more accurate freeform surface modeling and tessellation capabilities for faceted representations of complex geometries. For example, the 2019 and 2022 editions of Part 42 expanded topological operators and hybrid representations to better handle modern CAD workflows. These refinements reflect ongoing harmonization efforts within ISO/TC 184/SC 4 to align with industry needs for precise, efficient data handling.

Application Reference Models

The Application Reference Models (ARMs) in ISO 10303, detailed in Parts 201 through 209, establish high-level, abstract representations of information requirements for broad product data domains, independent of specific implementation choices. These models define conceptual schemas that capture essential entities, relationships, and constraints needed for data exchange in areas such as mechanical design, draughting, and structural analysis, serving as foundational guides for developing tailored Application Protocols (APs). By focusing on user-oriented requirements rather than low-level technical mappings, ARMs promote interoperability and consistency across diverse systems and industries. These models align with the updated architectural principles in ISO 10303-1:2024.
The primary purpose of these ARMs is to act as blueprints that ensure standardized representation of product information throughout its lifecycle, facilitating seamless exchange without prescribing formats or methods. For example, the ARM in Part 203 addresses configuration-controlled 3D designs, outlining requirements for product structureincluding assemblies, components, and their geometric representationsas well as design history and change management to support traceability and versioning. Similarly, Part 209's ARM provides an abstract model for multidisciplinary analysis of composite and metallic structures, emphasizing data needs for design validation and optimization while abstracting away implementation details. These models draw upon building blocks from the Integrated Resources to define domain semantics.
Key elements of the ARMs include entity definitions for core concepts like product configurations, geometric topologies, and administrative data, with mappings to integrated resource schemas that highlight requirements such as effectivity constraints for lifecycle stages and approval workflows for changes. In Part 242 (as of the 2025 edition), for instance, the ARM specifies associative relationships between 2D/3D drawings and underlying models in managed model-based 3D engineering, ensuring that annotations and views maintain consistency with product definitions. This structure enables comprehensive coverage of application needs, such as maintaining version integrity in evolving designs.
Developers and standards bodies use these ARMs to derive Application Interpreted Models (AIMs), which translate the abstract requirements into implementable constructs by explicitly mapping ARM entities to the generic schemas of the Integrated Resources. This process bridges high-level domain needs with reusable, protocol-independent components, allowing for flexible adaptation in APs while upholding the original information requirements for areas like product structure and life cycle support.

Standard Structure

Parts Organization

ISO 10303, known as STEP (STandard for the Exchange of Product model data), is structured as a multi-part international standard, with its components systematically classified into series based on part numbering to enable modular development, independent updates, and cohesive cross-referencing across the architecture. This organization supports the standard's goal of facilitating interoperable product data exchange by separating foundational elements from domain-specific applications.
The primary series include description methods (parts 1019), which define core specification tools such as the overview and scope in Part 1 and the EXPRESS information modeling language in Part 11; implementation methods (parts 2039), covering practical data exchange formats like the clear text encoding of Part 21; conformance testing methodology and framework (parts 3139), outlining validation frameworks including abstract test suites specified in parts 3135, with specific abstract test suites for application protocols in parts 500599; integrated resources (parts 4099), providing generic constructs for product description, geometry, and topology in parts 4159, extended by application-integrated resources in parts 100199; application reference models (parts 200209), establishing high-level models for specific domains like configuration-controlled design in Part 203; application interpreted constructs (parts 210219), offering harmonized legacy constructs for interoperability; and application protocols (parts 220 and above), delivering domain-tailored implementations such as product life cycle support in Part 239. This numbering convention ensures logical grouping, with lower numbers focusing on foundational and generic elements, while higher numbers address specialized protocols.
As of 2025, ISO 10303 encompasses over 120 published parts, reflecting continuous expansion to cover emerging needs in product data management, with examples including Part 1 for general overview and Part 203 for configuration-controlled 3D designs of mechanical parts and assemblies. The modular design allows individual parts to be revised or extended without disrupting the entire standard, while explicit cross-referencessuch as those linking integrated resources to application protocolsmaintain architectural cohesion and enable reuse of common constructs across series.
The development and maintenance of these parts are overseen by ISO Technical Committee 184, Subcommittee 4 (ISO/TC 184/SC 4), which coordinates international collaboration through working groups to propose amendments, new parts, and harmonizations. Revisions follow ISO systematic review cycles, typically every five years, supplemented by ad hoc updates via technical corrigenda or new editions to address technological advancements, ensuring the standard's relevance in industrial automation and integration.

Application Interpreted Constructs

Application Interpreted Constructs in ISO 10303, as defined in parts 211 through 219, provide Application Interpreted Models (AIMs) that offer standardized interpretations of the integrated resources to address ambiguities present in the corresponding Application Reference Models (ARMs). These AIMs ensure that domain-specific requirements, such as those for electronic testing in part 211 or automotive mechanical design in part 214, are mapped consistently to reusable generic constructs from the integrated resources series. By specifying how ARM entities are realized using lower-level resources like geometry and topology, the constructs facilitate interoperable data exchange across product lifecycle stages without requiring custom schema development for each application.
The core process involves a systematic mapping of ARM concepts to integrated resources, resolving interpretive ambiguities to enable lossless data translation between high-level application views and implementable models. For instance, an ARM entity representing a "part" in automotive design (part 214) is interpreted through resources for topological representations (ISO 10303-42) and geometric models (ISO 10303-41), ensuring that shape, connectivity, and associativity are preserved during exchange. This mapping process, detailed in each part's AIM schema, supports bidirectional conformance testing and verification, allowing systems to claim compliance to specific constructs rather than entire protocols.
Representative examples of these constructs include those for assemblies, where part 214 defines hierarchical product structures with kinematic constraints and mating conditions using assembly resources (ISO 10303-51); tolerances, as in conformance class CC12 of part 214, which interprets geometric dimensioning and tolerancing via shape tolerance resources (ISO 10303-47); and representations, supporting multiple views such as design intent and manufacturing geometry through advanced brep and faceted models in parts like 214 and 219. Part 219, for dimensional inspection, extends this to measurement features and tolerance zones, enabling exchange of inspection plans for solid parts and assemblies.
These constructs benefit implementation by promoting reuse of verified resource interpretations, reducing development costs, and enabling partial conformance to application protocols without full implementation, thus accelerating adoption in industries like automotive and electronics.

Implementation Methods

ISO 10303 specifies several standardized methods for encoding and transferring product data between systems, ensuring interoperability across diverse software environments. The primary methods include clear text encoding via Part 21, XML-based representation via Part 28, and programmatic access through the Standard Data Access Interface (SDAI) defined in Part 22, with additional bindings for languages like C++, C, and Java in subsequent parts. These approaches support the serialization of data modeled in EXPRESS schemas from the technical framework, enabling neutral exchange without proprietary formats.
Part 21 defines the clear text encoding of the exchange structure, commonly used for STEP files with extensions .stp or .step, which are ASCII-based and human-readable. This format organizes data into sections such as HEADER, FILE_SCHEMA, ENDSEC, and DATA, where the schema (e.g., an Application Protocol like AP242) is declared, followed by entity instances identified by numeric references. For instance, a basic structure might appear as: HEADER; FILE_SCHEMA(('AP242')); ENDSEC; DATA; #10=PRODUCT('Part Name',...); ENDSEC; END-ISO-10303-21;. This syntax allows for explicit representation of attributes, including optional ones marked with '$' for unset values, and supports inheritance from EXPRESS-defined entities. The format facilitates file-based transfer and includes provisions for digital signatures in the header to verify integrity and authenticity.
Part 28 provides an XML representation of EXPRESS schemas and data, known as STEP-XML, which is particularly suited for web services and integration with XML ecosystems. It maps EXPRESS constructs to XML schemas, enabling structured data exchange over networks while maintaining semantic fidelity to the original models. This method supports direct API interactions and database mappings by leveraging XML's parsability, allowing systems to import or export STEP data via standard XML tools without custom parsers.
The SDAI in Part 22 offers implementor concepts for API-based access, defining an abstract interface for creating, querying, and manipulating STEP data in memory or databases. Language bindings, such as those in Parts 23 (C++), 24 (C), and 27 (Java), provide concrete implementations for programmatic transfer, bypassing file intermediaries for real-time applications. These mechanisms support compression, such as ZIP archiving in Part 21 files, to reduce transfer sizes, and digital signatures for secure exchanges.
Evolution of these methods has focused on robustness; for example, the third edition of Part 21, published in 2016, introduced anchors and references for linking multiple files, enhanced error handling for malformed data, and improved clarity in encoding rules to minimize implementation ambiguities.

Application Protocols

Core Protocols

The core protocols of ISO 10303, also known as STEP (Standard for the Exchange of Product Model Data), provide foundational application protocols (APs) for representing and exchanging general product data across the product lifecycle, focusing on mechanical design, automotive processes, and life cycle support. These protocols build upon the integrated resources defined in the technical framework, such as the EXPRESS language and application reference models, to ensure interoperability in product data exchange. They establish standardized schemas for configuration management, geometric representation, and support information, enabling neutral data formats that are independent of specific software systems.
AP203, titled "Configuration controlled 3D design of mechanical parts and assemblies," was first published in 1994 and updated in its second edition in 2011. It specifies the information requirements for exchanging product definition data, including 3D geometry, assembly structures, and configuration baselines for mechanical engineering designs. The protocol supports the representation of part shapes using boundary representation (B-rep) and constructive solid geometry (CSG), along with product structure hierarchies and version control to manage design changes.
AP214, known as "Core data for automotive mechanical design processes," was initially released in 2001 and reached its third edition in 2010 before being integrated into the broader AP242 protocol. It extends the capabilities of AP203 by incorporating additional features tailored to automotive applications, such as sheet metal features, welding specifications, and presentation data like layers and colors. The protocol facilitates the exchange of design data for components involving forming operations, joint representations, and tolerance annotations, ensuring compatibility in mechanical design workflows.
AP239, or "Product life cycle support" (PLCS), was first published in 2005, with its second edition in 2012 and third edition in 2024. It defines an information model for managing product data throughout the entire lifecycle, particularly emphasizing maintenance, logistics, and in-service support activities. The protocol covers representations of product states, maintenance tasks, usage history, and supply chain events, allowing for the integration of operational data with initial design information to support sustainment and logistics planning.
A key commonality among these core protocols is the use of conformance classes (CCs), which define subsets of functionality to ensure implementers support specific capabilities progressively. For instance, in AP203, CC1 provides basic configuration-controlled design information without shape representation, while higher classes like CC2 add support for advanced geometry such as B-spline curves and surfaces. These classes enable modular adoption and verification of compliance. Furthermore, the protocols are widely used in supply chains to facilitate data exchange between original equipment manufacturers and suppliers, promoting consistency in product definition across collaborative environments.

Domain-Specific Protocols

Domain-specific protocols in ISO 10303, known as Application Protocols (APs), are specialized subsets tailored to particular engineering domains, enabling precise data exchange for sector-specific needs such as design, analysis, and systems integration. These protocols build upon the standard's core integrated resources and application reference models to address unique requirements in industries like manufacturing, aerospace, and systems engineering, ensuring interoperability while supporting model-based approaches. Unlike general-purpose core protocols, domain-specific APs incorporate domain knowledge through application interpreted constructs, facilitating seamless data sharing across tools and processes in targeted fields.
AP242, titled "Managed model-based 3D engineering," serves as a key protocol for discrete parts manufacturing, integrating geometric design, product manufacturing information (PMI), assembly structures, and validation data to support end-to-end processes from conceptual design to production and archiving. Initially published in 2014, it merges elements from earlier protocols like AP203 and AP214, emphasizing long-term data preservation and exchange for complex 3D models. The second edition in 2020 extended capabilities to electrical design and enhanced geometric representations, while the third edition in 2022 refined support for advanced manufacturing scenarios. The fourth edition, released in August 2025, further advances features including improved modeling for composites and enhanced integration for collaborative engineering environments.
AP209, "Multidisciplinary analysis and design," focuses on exchanging simulation and analysis data for complex components, particularly those involving composites and finite element analysis (FEA), to enable multidisciplinary optimization across engineering teams. Developed in the early 2000s and updated in its second edition per ISO 10303-209:2014, it supports linear and nonlinear structural, thermal, and modal analyses, including mesh data, boundary conditions, and material properties for long-term archiving. This protocol is widely used in aerospace and automotive sectors for integrating design intent with simulation results, ensuring traceability in iterative design workflows.
AP233, "Systems engineering," addresses model-based systems engineering (MBSE) by providing a standardized representation for system requirements, architecture, behavior, and verification data, facilitating the exchange of hierarchical system models across the lifecycle. Published as ISO 10303-233:2012, it includes mappings to SysML (Systems Modeling Language) elements, supporting the integration of functional, physical, and parametric views for complex systems like aircraft or vehicles. This protocol enables consistent data sharing between systems engineering tools, promoting traceability from requirements to implementation in collaborative environments.
Emerging developments within ISO 10303 extend domain-specific protocols to innovative areas, such as additive manufacturing through dedicated modules in AP242 that define part build information, process parameters, and lattice structures for 3D printing workflows. These extensions, introduced in AP242 Edition 2 and refined in Editions 3 and 4, align with ISO 14649 for machining data to support hybrid manufacturing processes. Additionally, ISO 10303 protocols underpin digital twin frameworks in manufacturing, as outlined in ISO 23247, by providing neutral models for real-time synchronization of physical assets with virtual representations, enhancing predictive maintenance and process optimization in discrete manufacturing domains.

Protocol Coverage and Evolution

ISO 10303 encompasses more than 20 application protocols (APs) that provide comprehensive coverage across diverse engineering domains, including mechanical design and assembly (e.g., AP203 and AP214), electrical and electronic components (e.g., AP210), ship structures (AP215), process planning and manufacturing (AP238), and building information modeling through extensions in AP242. These protocols enable the standardized exchange of product data throughout the lifecycle, from conceptual design to maintenance, supporting industries such as aerospace, automotive, and construction. However, notable gaps persist in handling real-time Internet of Things (IoT) data streams, as the standard primarily addresses static, structured product models rather than dynamic, low-latency sensor integrations required for operational monitoring in smart manufacturing environments.
The evolution of these protocols reflects a shift from domain-specific, standalone implementations to more holistic, integrated frameworks. Early protocols like AP203 focused narrowly on configuration-controlled mechanical design, limiting interoperability across disciplines. In contrast, later developments such as AP242 merge capabilities from mechanical, electrical, and manufacturing domains into a unified model-based engineering approach, facilitating end-to-end product data management. This progression has been supported by harmonization initiatives, including ISO/TS 10303-1030, which forms part of the STEP Module and Resource Library (SMRL), providing a centralized repository of reusable application modules and resources to reduce redundancy and enhance consistency across protocols.
To ensure practical implementation, each AP defines multiple conformance classessubsets of functionality that implementations must fully supportallowing tailored adoption without requiring the entire protocol. For example, AP242 specifies over 10 conformance classes, covering aspects from basic geometry exchange to advanced product manufacturing information (PMI) and assembly structures. Recent enhancements also emphasize semantics and ontologies, with extensions like OntoSTEP enabling the translation of EXPRESS schemas to OWL-DL ontologies, thereby supporting logical reasoning and semantic interoperability for complex product models.
Looking ahead, efforts are underway to align ISO 10303 protocols, particularly AP242, with ISO 19650 for improved integration in BIM workflows, ensuring seamless data flow in construction and facility management projects. Additionally, emerging developments point to the potential creation of new APs tailored for AI-driven design, incorporating machine learning-compatible structures to automate and optimize product lifecycle processes.

Implementation and Adoption

Data Formats and Exchange

ISO 10303 defines several standardized formats for storing and exchanging product data, enabling interoperability across diverse systems in manufacturing and engineering domains. The primary format is the STEP-file, specified in ISO 10303-21, which uses a clear text encoding of the exchange structure to represent product data modeled in the EXPRESS language. This ASCII-based format is human-readable, facilitating direct inspection and debugging, and supports the transfer of complex geometries, assemblies, and associated metadata from one computer system to another without loss of information.
For scenarios requiring integration with web services or service-oriented architectures, ISO 10303-28 introduces STEP-XML, an XML-based representation of EXPRESS schemas and governed data. This format maps STEP entities to XML elements, allowing seamless exchange in XML-native environments like web applications or XML databases, while maintaining fidelity to the underlying product model. Binary variants, such as those outlined in ISO/TS 10303-1369, provide efficiency gains for large datasets by encoding data in a compact binary form, reducing file sizes and improving transfer speeds in performance-critical applications.
Data exchange in ISO 10303 occurs through mechanisms like direct file transfer of STEP-files, which is the most common method for sharing neutral files between CAD systems or supply chain partners. API-based exchanges leverage implementation methods, such as those in ISO/TS 10303-25, to bind EXPRESS models to extensible metadata interchange formats, enabling programmatic access in integrated environments. Federated database approaches distribute data across systems while ensuring consistency via shared schemas, with provisions for handling versions and revisions through entity attributes that track changes over the product lifecycle.
Best practices for ISO 10303 exchanges emphasize the use of header sections in STEP-files to identify the governing schema, file author, and creation details, ensuring unambiguous interpretation by receiving systems. Validation against predefined conformance classessubsets of application protocols tailored to specific use casesis essential to verify data integrity and compliance before transfer. Compression techniques, such as ZIP archiving of STEP-files, are recommended for optimizing bandwidth in large-scale exchanges without altering the standard format.
A representative example involves exporting a 3D assembly model from a CAD tool to a .stp file for supplier review; the file encapsulates geometric shapes, tolerances, and material properties in a neutral format, allowing the recipient to import it into their analysis software for simulation or manufacturing preparation.

Tools and Software

Several open-source tools facilitate the creation, manipulation, and processing of ISO 10303 data, particularly for geometry and product model exchange. The STEPcode project, the successor to NIST's original STEP Class Library, provides C++ libraries for representing and handling EXPRESS schemas (ISO 10303-11) and STEP Part 21 files, enabling developers to build applications for reading, writing, and validating STEP data across various application protocols. Originally developed by NIST as a C++ toolkit in the 1990s, it supports core ISO 10303 parts including 21 (exchange format), 22 (SDAI interface), and 23 (language bindings), with ongoing community maintenance for modern implementations. Open CASCADE Technology (OCCT), an open-source platform, offers robust support for STEP geometry processing through its XDE component, allowing import and export of AP203, AP214, and AP242 files while preserving assembly structures, colors, validation properties, and product manufacturing information (PMI) such as dimensions and tolerances. This makes OCCT suitable for integrating STEP data into CAD viewers and converters, with free availability under the LGPL license for both personal and commercial use.
Commercial software provides comprehensive toolkits and integrations for broader ISO 10303 adoption in enterprise environments. The STEP Tools SDK, a commercial C++ and Java library suite, supports the full range of ISO 10303 standards, including all application protocols like AP242, with APIs for reading, writing, editing, and validating STEP files in applications such as PLM systems. It enables embedding STEP functionality directly into custom software, handling complex data like assemblies and PMI without external dependencies. Autodesk Inventor and Fusion 360 include built-in exporters for STEP files compliant with ISO 10303, supporting AP203 (configuration-controlled design), AP214 (automotive mechanical design), and AP242 (managed model-based 3D engineering with PMI). These tools allow users to save parts and assemblies as single STEP files, with options for spline accuracy to balance file size and precision. Dassault Systmes' CATIA V5 and later versions feature importers for STEP AP203 and AP214, adhering to ISO 10303-21 and CAx Implementor Forum recommended practices for external references, colors, layers, and geometric validation. This ensures reliable ingestion of STEP data into CATIA workbenches, generating reports on import success and errors for entities like curves, surfaces, and solids.
Validation tools are essential for ensuring ISO 10303 data integrity and interoperability. The NIST STEP File Analyzer, a free standalone application, examines STEP files (AP203, AP214, AP242) for conformance to the standard by generating spreadsheets of entities and attributes, detecting syntax errors like unresolved references, and analyzing PMI elements including semantic tolerances and validation properties. It aligns with CAx Implementor Forum guidelines, producing reports that highlight deviations to aid debugging in CAD/CAM/CAE workflows. The CAx Implementor Forum (now part of the MBx Interoperability Forum) develops standardized test suites for ISO 10303 conformance, focusing on AP242 editions 1 through 3, with datasets and procedures to verify translator accuracy for geometry, assemblies, and PMI across vendor implementations. These suites, updated regularly through collaborative rounds, include over 50 test cases per edition to measure interoperability without disrupting existing systems.
For development purposes, APIs in toolkits like the STEP Tools SDK allow seamless embedding of ISO 10303 capabilities into PLM systems, supporting data exchange for product lifecycle management by integrating STEP schemas with proprietary databases for tasks like version control and simulation embedding (e.g., via AP209 for finite element analysis). Recent advancements include enhanced AP242:2025 (edition 4) support in 2024-2025 software releases; for instance, STEP Tools SDK version 20.3 (May 2025) added PMI features like tolerance modifiers from the then-upcoming edition 4, while HOOPS Exchange 2024.7 introduced beta support for AP242 editions 2 and 3, and SOLIDWORKS 2025 enabled direct publishing to STEP AP242 with PMI preservation. These updates facilitate model-based engineering by improving associativity and presentation data handling in PLM integrations.

Industry Applications

ISO 10303, known as STEP, has seen substantial adoption in the aerospace sector, where application protocols such as AP203 and AP242 facilitate the exchange of configuration-controlled 3D designs for aircraft parts across complex supply chains. Major manufacturers like Boeing and Airbus utilize these protocols to enable seamless data sharing with suppliers, supporting model-based engineering from design through manufacturing and sustainment. For instance, Boeing employs STEP for production data exchange with engine suppliers including Pratt & Whitney, Rolls-Royce, and GE Aircraft Engines, which has contributed to significant efficiency gains, such as a 93% reduction in design changes during the development of the Boeing 777, the first large transport aircraft designed without a physical mock-up. Overall, STEP implementation in aerospace has realized annual savings of approximately $35 million (in 2001 dollars) through improved interoperability, with potential for up to $253 million annually by mitigating costs associated with manual data reentry and file transfers. Airbus further leverages AP242 for 3D digital mock-up (DMU) data exchange with cabin equipment suppliers and for long-term archiving of A350 aircraft definitions, enhancing digital continuity and resilience against obsolescence throughout the product lifecycle.
In the automotive industry, ISO 10303 protocols like AP214 and AP242 are widely applied for exchanging data on body-in-white structures and assemblies, integrating with leading CAD systems such as CATIA and NX to streamline collaborative design processes. Automakers including Ford and Volkswagen rely on these standards to manage complex assemblies and ensure compatibility across supplier networks, reducing errors in geometric and product manufacturing information (PMI) transfer. This integration supports model-based definition workflows, allowing for precise representation of tolerances, materials, and assembly instructions without proprietary format dependencies. The adoption has led to substantial potential annual savings of $470 million (in 2001 dollars) by addressing interoperability challenges in design and production phases.
Beyond aerospace and automotive, ISO 10303 finds application in other sectors through specialized protocols. In shipbuilding, AP215 enables the exchange of ship arrangement definitions, including geometric representations of compartments and spatial configurations, supporting functional and physical design activities in naval and commercial vessel construction. For plant design, AP227 provides structures for representing spatial configurations in process plants and ship systems, facilitating the integration of piping, equipment layout, and process requirements. Adoption is also growing in consumer electronics, where STEP supports the configuration management of electro-mechanical designs, such as in personal computer assemblies, promoting interoperability in global supply chains.
Notable case studies highlight the practical impact of ISO 10303 in defense logistics through AP239, the Product Life Cycle Support (PLCS) protocol. Pilots led by organizations like PDES Inc., in collaboration with the U.S. Army Logistics Support Activity (LOGSA), have demonstrated effective data exchange using PLCS for maintenance and sustainment information, including integration with standards like S3000L for logistics product data. For example, a UTRS pilot with the U.S. Army successfully exchanged Boeing aircraft data using PLCS adapters, achieving up to a 30% reduction in authoring task times for technical data packages and improving overall lifecycle cost management. By 2025, STEP support has become ubiquitous in major CAD systems, with most modern tools like CATIA, NX, and SolidWorks offering native compatibility, enabling widespread industry adoption for neutral data exchange.

Challenges and Future Directions

Limitations and Criticisms

ISO 10303, known as STEP, presents significant challenges due to its inherent complexity, particularly in the development and implementation of its numerous application protocols (APs). The standard encompasses over 20 APs, each with multiple conformance classes that define subsets of functionality, requiring implementers to navigate intricate schemas defined in the EXPRESS language. This structure results in a steep learning curve, as full utilization demands deep understanding of modular components like application modules and interpreted constructs, often exceeding the needs of typical business processes. For instance, AP239's large, generic information model frequently overwhelms users, necessitating custom data exchange specifications to simplify subsets.
File sizes represent another practical limitation, especially for large assemblies, where STEP files can grow substantially larger than native CAD formats due to the verbose textual representation of detailed product data. This impacts storage, transfer times, and processing efficiency, prompting recommendations to modularize assemblies into smaller files for manageability. Additionally, the standard offers limited native support for dynamic simulations, as many APs prioritize static geometry and configuration data over time-dependent analyses, and it lacks integrated provisions for augmented reality (AR) or virtual reality (VR) integrations, restricting its applicability in immersive design environments.
Criticisms of ISO 10303 often center on its slow update cycles, with major editions requiring 57 years or more due to the collaborative efforts of multiple international committees and the need to accommodate evolving technologies. For example, AP239 progressed from edition 1 in 2005 to edition 2 in 2012, with edition 3 not finalizing until after 2016 pilots. Interoperability remains problematic with non-compliant tools, as non-conforming implementations fail to exchange data effectively, exacerbated by incompatibilities between APs and issues like entity mismatches or model quality degradation in geometry transfers. The high cost of conformance testing further hinders adoption, involving expensive development of abstract test suites and validation tools, which can strain vendors without a strong business case.
Backward compatibility poses ongoing challenges during updates, as transitions between editions or from proprietary formats to STEP are not always loss-free, potentially losing features, constraints, or parametric data. Gaps persist in emerging areas, such as support for AI-generated designs, where the standard's rigid schemas struggle to capture generative processes, and blockchain-based traceability, lacking mechanisms for immutable audit trails beyond basic lifecycle data. To mitigate these issues, ISO 10303 employs modular conformance classes, allowing partial implementations that focus on specific functionalities, and ongoing harmonization efforts through application modules promote reusability across APs, reducing redundancy and implementation overhead.

Ongoing Developments

Current efforts in ISO 10303 development focus on integrating the standard with complementary frameworks to enhance its role in digital twin ecosystems. For instance, research at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) explores alignments between ISO 10303 and ISO 23247 series for digital twins in manufacturing, enabling structured product data exchange to support observable manufacturing elements and lifecycle traceability. Similarly, initiatives like the TruePLM project leverage ISO 10303 repositories to facilitate digital twin implementations in complex systems, such as space environments, by storing and querying product model data.
Emerging application protocols (APs) are being developed to address sustainability and cybersecurity in manufacturing. NIST's Digital Thread for Manufacturing project incorporates ISO 10303 to standardize product definitions while integrating cybersecurity measures for data assets, aiming to secure exchanges in smart manufacturing environments. For sustainability, extensions support environmental product declarations (EPDs) aligned with ISO 22057, bridging gaps in machine-interpretability for building and civil engineering data within product lifecycle management (PLM) systems.
The publication of ISO 10303-242:2025 (Edition 4) in August 2025 marks a significant advancement, expanding the scope for managed model-based 3D engineering to include additive manufacturing, composite design, and requirements management across automotive, aerospace, and mechanical sectors. Parallel initiatives emphasize enhancements for cloud-based data exchange and semantic interoperability, such as mappings to OWL ontologies via projects like OntoSTEP, which translate STEP data into OWL-DL for reasoning and integration with broader semantic web technologies.
Collaborations with other standards bodies are advancing enterprise integration. ISO 10303 is being harmonized with IEC 62264 (ISA-95) to enable seamless information exchange between enterprise systems and manufacturing controls, supporting models for product data representation in system design stages. PDES, Inc., through initiatives like the MBx Implementor Forum and LOTAR, is driving roadmaps for ISO 10303 adoption, focusing on full lifecycle coverage via model-based engineering and long-term archiving to connect digital enterprises by 2030.
Ongoing research highlights extensions to STEP-NC (AP238) for smart manufacturing, including mappings for additive processes in ISO 14649-17 to support interoperable CNC control and monitoring. Additionally, pilot projects explore blockchain-verified data exchange within PLM frameworks, using ISO 10303 for immutable product passports that enhance traceability and regulatory compliance in sectors like aviation.

References

ISO 10303-1:2024(en), Industrial automation systems and integration

STEP at NIST - National Institute of Standards and Technology

 Introduction to ISO 10303 - the STEP Standard for Product Data ...

The STEP Standard - ISO 10303

ISO 10303-1:2021 - Industrial automation systems and integration

Introduction to ISO 10303 - the STEP Standard for Product Data ...

Introduction to ISO 10303 - The STEP Standard for Product Data ...

 STEP APPLICATION HANDBOOK ISO 10303 VERSION 3 - PDES, Inc.

ISO 10303-203:2011 - Industrial automation systems and integration ...

ISO 10303-242:2022 - Industrial automation systems and integration ...

ISO 10303-239:2024 - Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303-1:2024 - Industrial automation systems and integration

On Migrating ISO 10303 PMI Models to a Common Core | NIST

 A brief history of early product data exchange standards

 ISO TC 184/SC4: reference manual

Don't panic, EXPRESS

(PDF) STEP: The Grand Experience - ResearchGate

ISO 10303-21:1994 Industrial automation systems and integration ...

ISO 10303-11:1994 - The EXPRESS language reference manual

ISO 10303-214:2001 Industrial automation systems and integration ...

ISO 10303-239:2005 - Industrial automation systems and integration ...

ISO 10303-42:2000 - Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303-43:2000 - Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303-28:2007 - Industrial automation systems and integration

 A MODULAR ARCHITECTURE FOR STEP

ISO 10303-242:2014 - Industrial automation systems and integration

Fact Sheet: ISO 10303-242 (STEP AP242) - prostep ivip

ISO 10303-242:2020 - Industrial automation systems and integration ...

Additive Manufacturing - ePLM Interoperability - AP242.org

ISO 10303-242:2025 - Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303 STEP Standards - STEP Tools

AP239

 NIST.AMS.300-12.pdf

 Speed, the double-edged sword of the Industry 4.0

 Utilizing PLM and ISO 10303 (STEP) for managing advanced ...

ISO 10303-11:2004 - The EXPRESS language reference manual

EXPRESS (p11) - JSDAI

 ISO 10303-11 - iTeh Standards

 ISO 10303-11 - Jotne Connect

ISO 10303-41:2022 - Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303-42:2022 - Geometric and topological representation

ISO 10303-43:2022 - Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303-44:2019 - Product structure configuration

ISO 10303-45:2018 - Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303-42:2019 - Geometric and topological representation

STEP Application Protocols

ISO 10303-209:2014 - Industrial automation systems and integration

https://www.iso.org/standard/60612.html

PLCS DEX:ISO 10303-239

ISO/TC 184/SC 4 - Industrial data

ISO 10303-1:2021(en), Industrial automation systems and integration

ISO 10303-214:2010 - Industrial automation systems and integration

 ISO 10303-214 | iTeh Standards

ISO 10303-201:1994(en), Industrial automation systems and ...

ISO 10303-22:1998 Industrial automation systems and integration ...

ISO 10303-21:2016 - Industrial automation systems and integration

https://www.steptools.com/stds/step/IS_final_p21e3.html

ISO 10303-203:1994/Cor 1:1996

STEP-file, ISO 10303-21 - Library of Congress

ISO 10303-209 "Multidisciplinary Analysis and Design" - AP209

AP233 systems engineering - ISO/TS 10303-433:2010

A review of the technology standards for enabling digital twin

ISO/TS 10303-1030:2024 - Industrial automation systems and ...

 OntoSTEP: OWL-DL Ontology for STEP

ISO 10303 - STEP Tools

ISO/TS 10303-1369:2008 - Industrial automation systems and ...

ISO/TS 10303-25:2005 - Industrial automation systems and integration

STEP File Analyzer and Viewer | NIST

Welcome - STEPcode

STEP Class Library (SCL) | NIST

CAD Assistant - Open Cascade

https://dev.opencascade.org/doc/overview/html/occt_user_guides__step.html

What are the Inventor Save As STEP Export Options (*.stp, *.ste, *.step)

STEP: Import - Catia V5 CATIADOC

 CAx-IF Round 50J Test Suite - MBx Interoperability Forum

Welcome to the MBx Interoperability Forum

STEP AIM EXPRESS Library Change Log

HOOPS Exchange 2024.7.0 - HOOPS Documentation - Tech Soft 3D

2025 SolidWorks - Publish to STEP242 PropertyManager

 Economic Impact Assessment of the International Standard for the ...

None

ISO10303 compatible data model and its applications for PC ...

 White Paper - NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS)

ISO 10303 The Essential Guide to Product Data Exchange (STEP ...

 Data Exchange Standards Overview - AP233/AP239 ... - OMG Wiki

What Is STEP format? | partZpro

 ISO 10303 (STEP) AP 239 edition 3 Application Protocol For Product ...

Improving conformance and interoperability testing

ISO 10303, the STEP standard for product data exchange, and its ...

Introduction to ISO 10303 - the STEP Standard for Product Data ...

 The Risks of AI and How Blockchain Can Solve Them - Labour Tech

The STEP Modular Architecture | J. Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng.

 TruePLM (ISO 10303 Repository) & Digital Twin Workshop

Digital Thread for Manufacturing | NIST

Gaps in the machine-interpretability of ISO 22057 EPDs

SO 10303 and IEC 62264 standards within a manufacturing ...

PDES, Inc. Connecting the Digital Enterprise

STEP-NC in additive manufacturing: a comprehensive review ...

 Integration of Digital Product Passport with Existing PLM Systems
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion