Kruskal's algorithm Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Kruskal's algorithm
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Kruskal's algorithm is a greedy algorithm that computes a minimum spanning tree (MST) for a connected, undirected graph with weighted edges by selecting a subset of edges that connects all vertices while minimizing the total edge weight sum.
First described by mathematician Joseph B. Kruskal in his 1956 paper "On the Shortest Spanning Subtree of a Graph and the Traveling Salesman Problem," the algorithm provides an efficient solution to the MST problem, which has applications in network design, clustering, and approximation algorithms for problems like the traveling salesman problem.
The algorithm operates by sorting all edges in non-decreasing order of weight and initializing a forest where each vertex forms its own tree. It then iterates through the sorted edges, adding an edge to the MST if it connects two distinct components (i.e., does not form a cycle), using a union-find (disjoint-set) data structure to track components and detect cycles efficiently. This process continues until all vertices are connected, resulting in a tree with exactly V-1 edges for a graph with V vertices.
Kruskal's algorithm relies on the cut property of MSTs, which states that the minimum-weight edge crossing any cut in the graph belongs to some MST, ensuring the greedy choice yields an optimal solution. Its time complexity is O(E log E), where E is the number of edges, dominated by the sorting step, though it simplifies to O(E log V) for sparse graphs; the union-find operations contribute nearly constant time per operation with path compression and union by rank. Compared to Prim's algorithm, Kruskal's is particularly effective for graphs with fewer edges relative to vertices, as it processes edges globally rather than growing from a starting vertex.

Background

Minimum spanning tree

In an undirected, connected graph with nnn vertices, a spanning tree is a subgraph that forms a tree and includes all the original vertices, thereby connecting them without any cycles. Such a spanning tree consists of exactly n1n-1n1 edges.
A minimum spanning tree (MST) of a connected, edge-weighted undirected graph is a spanning tree whose total edge weight is minimized among all possible spanning trees. In such graphs with non-negative edge weights, an MST is guaranteed to exist and also contains exactly n1n-1n1 edges. The MST problem was first addressed by Otakar Borvka in 1926 for practical network applications, with the modern algorithmic formulations developed in the 1950s by Joseph Kruskal, Robert Prim, and references to Borvka's earlier work.
Minimum spanning trees are essential in optimization problems, particularly for designing efficient networks with minimal cost, such as connecting cities via roads or laying telecommunication cables while minimizing total length or expense. For instance, in transportation network design, an MST determines the lowest-cost infrastructure to link all locations without redundant paths.

Unionfind data structure

The unionfind data structure, also known as the disjoint-set data structure, maintains a collection of disjoint subsets that partition an underlying set of elements, enabling efficient tracking of connectivity among elements. It supports two fundamental operations: find, which returns the representative (typically the root) of the subset containing a specified element, and union, which merges two subsets into a single one. This structure models the components of a graph during processes like building a spanning tree, where elements represent vertices and subsets represent connected components.
The find operation traverses a tree from the given element to its root, and path compression enhances efficiency by updating the parent pointers of all nodes along this path to point directly to the root, effectively flattening the tree for subsequent operations. The union operation connects the roots of two trees; to keep trees shallow, union by rank attaches the root of the tree with the smaller rank to the one with the larger rank, where rank serves as an approximation of tree height (initially 0 for single-node trees, and incremented only when ranks are equal). Union by size is an alternative that merges the smaller tree under the root of the larger, tracking actual subtree sizes instead of ranks. These heuristics ensure balanced tree growth.
A basic implementation uses an array parent of size n (for n elements), where parent initially equals i (each element starts in its own singleton set), and nodes point to their parents to form forest trees. An auxiliary rank array (for union by rank) or size array (for union by size) stores balancing information, updated during merges. To perform find(x), iteratively follow parent until reaching a self-pointing root, optionally applying path compression by setting parent along the path to the root. For union(x, y), first find the roots r_x and r_y; if distinct, link the one with smaller rank (or size) to the other, incrementing rank if needed.
With path compression combined with union by rank or size, the amortized time complexity for a sequence of m operations on n elements is O(m(n))O(m \alpha(n))O(m(n)), where (n)\alpha(n)(n) is the inverse Ackermann function, a very slowly growing function that remains below 5 for all feasible n (effectively constant time per operation). Without these optimizations, operations can degenerate to O(n)O(n)O(n) in the worst case due to skewed trees.
In the context of minimum spanning tree computation, the unionfind structure facilitates cycle detection: before adding an edge between vertices u and v, the find operation checks if u and v share the same root; if they do, the edge connects vertices already in the same component and would form a cycle, so it is skipped; otherwise, union merges the components. This ensures the selected edges form a tree without cycles.

Algorithm

Steps

Kruskal's algorithm constructs a minimum spanning tree (MST) for an undirected, weighted graph by greedily selecting the smallest edges that do not form cycles. The procedure assumes the graph is connected; if disconnected, it produces a minimum spanning forest consisting of MSTs for each connected component.
The first step is to sort all edges of the graph in non-decreasing order of their weights. This ordering ensures that the algorithm considers potential MST edges starting from the lightest.
Next, initialize a unionfind data structure where each vertex begins in its own separate component, representing n singleton sets for a graph with n vertices. This structure efficiently tracks connected components during edge additions.
Then, iterate through the sorted list of edges. For each edge, check if its endpoints belong to different components using the unionfind structure. If they do, add the edge to the MST and merge (union) the two components; if they are already in the same component, skip the edge to avoid creating a cycle.
Continue this process until exactly n-1 edges have been added to the MST or all edges have been processed. At this point, the resulting structure is the MST (or forest if the graph is disconnected).
The algorithm handles edge cases such as graphs with multiple edges of equal weight correctly, though it may produce one of several possible MSTs in such scenarios, as the choice among equal-weight edges is arbitrary.

Pseudocode

Kruskal's algorithm is presented in pseudocode form below, utilizing a union-find data structure (also known as disjoint-set union or DSU) to efficiently manage connected components and detect cycles. This implementation follows the standard procedure introduced by Kruskal, adapted for modern computational representation.
The input graph $ G = (V, E) $ is undirected and connected, with $ V $ denoting the set of vertices and $ E $ the set of edges, where each edge is represented as a triple $ (u, v, w) $ with endpoints $ u, v \in V $ and weight $ w $. The output is a minimum spanning tree $ T $, a subset of $ |V| - 1 $ edges from $ E $ that connects all vertices without cycles and minimizes the total edge weight.
KRUSKAL(G, w)
1 A 
2 for each vertex u G.V
3 MAKE-SET(u)
4 sort the edges of G.E into nondecreasing order by weight w
5 for each edge (u, v) G.E, taken in sorted order
6 if FIND-SET(u) FIND-SET(v)
7 A A {(u, v)}
8 UNION(u, v)
9 return A
In this pseudocode, lines 13 initialize an empty set $ A $ to store the edges of the minimum spanning tree and create a separate set for each vertex using the union-find operations MAKE-SET, FIND-SET, and UNION, which track connected components. Line 4 sorts the edges by increasing weight, ensuring lighter edges are considered first to greedily build the tree. The loop in lines 58 iterates over the sorted edges; for each edge, it checks if adding it would form a cycle by verifying if its endpoints are in different components via FIND-SETif not, the edge is added to $ A $ and the components are merged with UNION.
This pseudocode assumes the graph is provided as an explicit edge list for direct sorting; if the input is an adjacency list representation, the edges must first be collected into a list before sorting.

Illustration

Example

Consider a simple undirected graph with four vertices labeled A, B, C, and D, and five weighted edges: AB with weight 1, AD with weight 2, BC with weight 3, AC with weight 4, and CD with weight 5. This graph can be visualized as a nearly complete network where A connects to all others, B connects to A and C, and C connects to B and D, forming a connected structure suitable for demonstrating minimum spanning tree construction.
To apply Kruskal's algorithm, first sort the edges in non-decreasing order of weight: AB (1), AD (2), BC (3), AC (4), CD (5). Initialize the unionfind data structure with each vertex in its own component: {A}, {B}, {C}, {D}.
Process the edges sequentially:

Add AB (weight 1): Vertices A and B are in different components, so union them. New components: {A, B}, {C}, {D}.

Add AD (weight 2): A and D are in different components, so union them. New components: {A, B, D}, {C}.

Add BC (weight 3): B and C are in different components, so union them. New components: {A, B, C, D}.

Skip AC (weight 4): A and C are already in the same component, forming a cycle.

Skip CD (weight 5): C and D are already in the same component, forming a cycle.

The resulting minimum spanning tree consists of the edges AB, AD, and BC, with a total weight of 6. This MST connects all vertices without cycles and can be depicted as a tree branching from A to B and D, with B further connected to C.

Analysis

Time complexity

Kruskal's algorithm has an overall time complexity of O(ElogE)O(E \log E)O(ElogE), where EEE is the number of edges in the graph, or equivalently O(ElogV)O(E \log V)O(ElogV) since EV2E \leq V^2EV2 for a graph with VVV vertices.
The dominant operation is sorting the edges by weight, which takes O(ElogE)O(E \log E)O(ElogE) time using a comparison-based sorting algorithm such as merge sort or heap sort. The subsequent processing involves EEE iterations, each performing a find operation to check for cycles and a potential union operation to merge components using a unionfind data structure. With union by rank and path compression, the amortized time for EEE such operations is O(E(V))O(E \alpha(V))O(E(V)), where \alpha is the inverse Ackermann function, which grows so slowly that it is effectively constant for all practical graph sizes. Thus, the unionfind operations contribute negligibly to the total time, leaving sorting as the bottleneck.
For sparse graphs where E=O(V)E = O(V)E=O(V), the complexity simplifies to O(VlogV)O(V \log V)O(VlogV), as the sorting cost dominates and logElogV\log E \approx \log VlogElogV. The best-case and worst-case complexities are the same asymptotically for connected graphs, as the algorithm always sorts all edges and processes each one. If edge weights are integers within a small range (up to WWW), a counting sort can reduce the sorting time to O(E+W)O(E + W)O(E+W), yielding a pseudopolynomial complexity, though the standard analysis assumes comparison-based sorting for arbitrary weights.

Space complexity

Kruskal's algorithm requires O(V + E) space overall, where V denotes the number of vertices and E the number of edges.
This arises from the need to store the edge list in O(E) space, the unionfind data structure using O(V) space for parent and rank arrays, and the output minimum spanning tree requiring O(V) space to hold its edges.
The sorting of edges typically demands auxiliary space of O(E), though in-place sorting methods can avoid this additional allocation in some implementations.
Relative to the input representation, the space usage remains linear in the graph's size, rendering the algorithm memory-efficient for large-scale graphs.

Correctness

Spanning tree property

Kruskal's algorithm constructs a spanning tree for connected undirected graphs and a spanning forest for disconnected ones, ensuring the output connects all vertices without cycles.
The acyclicity of the output follows from the algorithm's use of a unionfind data structure to add only edges that connect distinct components, preventing the formation of cycles. At every step, an edge is included in the growing structure only if its endpoints belong to different connected components in the current forest; otherwise, it is discarded. This guarantees that no cycle is introduced, as adding an edge within the same component would close a loop.
A key property is that the selected edges form a forest at every iteration of the algorithm. This can be established by induction on the number of edges added. For the base case with zero edges, the structure consists of $ V $ isolated vertices, which is a forest with $ V $ components. Assume that after adding $ i $ edges, the current set $ S $ forms a forest with $ V - i $ components. The next edge $ e $ added connects two distinct components in this forest (verified by the find operation in unionfind), resulting in a new set with $ V - i - 1 $ components and no cycles, preserving the forest property.
Regarding connectivity, the algorithm begins with $ V $ components and reduces the number by exactly one with each added edge, as each union merges two components. For a connected graph, it continues adding edges until $ V-1 $ edges are selected or a single component remains, at which point no further connecting edges exist among the remaining candidates; since the graph is connected, exactly $ V-1 $ edges are added, spanning all vertices. In a disconnected graph with $ c $ components, the process yields a minimum spanning forest consisting of $ c $ trees, with a total of $ V - c $ edges.

Minimality

The minimality of the spanning tree produced by Kruskal's algorithm follows from two fundamental properties of minimum spanning trees (MSTs): the cut property and the cycle property. The cut property states that, given any cut of the graph's vertices into two nonempty subsets SSS and VSV \setminus SVS, the minimum-weight edge crossing the cut belongs to some MST of the graph. To see why, suppose TTT is an MST and eee is the lightest crossing edge for the cut, but eTe \notin Te/T. Adding eee to TTT creates a cycle, which must contain another crossing edge fff. Replacing fff with eee yields a spanning tree of weight at most that of TTT (since w(e)w(f)w(e) \leq w(f)w(e)w(f)), contradicting the minimality of TTT unless w(e)=w(f)w(e) = w(f)w(e)=w(f), in which case T{e}{f}T \cup \{e\} \setminus \{f\}T{e}{f} is also an MST containing eee.
Kruskal's algorithm satisfies the cut property at each step, ensuring the selected edges form part of some MST. The edges are considered in non-decreasing order of weight. When an edge e=(u,v)e = (u, v)e=(u,v) is added, uuu and vvv lie in different connected components of the current forest (say, components AAA and BBB), defining the cut (A,B)(A, B)(A,B). Any lighter edge must have been considered earlier; if such an edge crossed (A,B)(A, B)(A,B), it would have connected AAA and BBB already, contradicting the separation. Thus, eee is the lightest edge crossing the cut, so by the cut property, eee belongs to some MST extending the current forest. By induction on the number of edges added, the final tree is an MST.
An alternative proof uses contradiction to show the total weight is minimal. Suppose TTT is the tree produced by Kruskal's algorithm and TT'T is another spanning tree with strictly smaller total weight. Order the edges by non-decreasing weight and let eee be the lowest-weight edge in the symmetric difference TTT \Delta T'TT (i.e., the first point of divergence). Since previous edges match, the endpoints of eee are in different components in the partial forest when eee is added to TTT. In TT'T, however, these endpoints are connected without eee, so the unique path in TT'T between them consists of edges heavier than or equal to w(e)w(e)w(e). Replacing the heaviest edge fff on that path with eee yields a spanning tree of weight at most that of TT'T (and strictly less if w(f)>w(e)w(f) > w(e)w(f)>w(e)), contradicting the minimality of TT'T. If w(f)=w(e)w(f) = w(e)w(f)=w(e), the process continues without increasing weight, but the assumption of smaller total weight leads to inconsistency.
The cycle property complements this by ensuring no suboptimal edges are included: for any cycle in the graph, the maximum-weight edge on the cycle cannot belong to any MST, as removing it and adding a lighter non-cycle edge would reduce the total weight. Kruskal's algorithm inherently respects this by rejecting edges that would form cycles, always selecting the lightest available edge that avoids them, thus maintaining minimality while building a tree structure.
If edge weights are not distinct, multiple MSTs may exist with the same minimum total weight. Kruskal's algorithm still produces one such MST, as ties in weight do not violate the greedy choice property; the specific order among equal-weight edges may vary, but the total weight remains minimal.

Extensions

Parallel implementation

Parallelizing Kruskal's algorithm for concurrent execution encounters significant challenges, primarily due to the sequential nature of sorting all edges by weight, which serves as a major bottleneck, and the requirement for thread-safe operations on the union-find data structure to handle simultaneous edge additions without conflicts. In theoretical models like the Parallel Random Access Machine (PRAM), the sorting step can be addressed using parallel comparison-based sorting algorithms that achieve O(log E) time with O(E / log E) processors. For the union-find component, concurrent implementations are essential; the seminal work by Shiloach and Vishkin introduced a parallel algorithm for disjoint-set operations in the CRCW PRAM model, enabling O(log V) time per operation with O(V) processors through techniques like pointer jumping to propagate finds efficiently.
To mitigate these issues and enhance parallelism, adaptations often integrate elements of Borvka's algorithm, which naturally decomposes into independent phases where each connected component simultaneously identifies its minimum-weight outgoing edge, reducing reliance on global sorting. This hybrid approach allows for efficient parallel execution, as demonstrated in the work by Chung and Condon, who developed a parallel Borvka-based minimum spanning tree algorithm for shared-memory architectures, achieving near-linear speedup on multiprocessors by distributing edge selections across processors. In the PRAM model, such variants attain O(log V) time complexity using E/V processors per phase, with the overall algorithm completing in O(log V) phases, providing a theoretical parallel speedup over the sequential O(E log V) bound.
Practical implementations leverage these ideas in software libraries and distributed frameworks. The Parallel Boost Graph Library includes distributed-memory minimum spanning tree algorithms based on Dehne and Gtz's BSP-model variants of Borvka and Kruskal hybrids, which scale to thousands of processors for graphs with millions of edges by partitioning the graph and synchronizing supersteps. In large-scale distributed environments, MapReduce adaptations of Kruskal's algorithm process edge sorting and union-find operations across clusters, as shown in implementations on Hadoop that handle billion-edge graphs with linear scalability in the number of reducers. For accelerator hardware, GPU-based versions, such as ECL-MST, unify Kruskal's edge processing with Borvka phases using atomic operations for union-find, achieving up to 10x speedup over CPU baselines on dense graphs with billions of edges.
Recent advancements as of 2025 include concurrent and distributed adaptations of Kruskal's algorithm for dynamic graphs, where edges are added or deleted over time. For instance, ContraMST employs incremental batch processing for efficient MST maintenance under updates, while other works propose online concurrent versions using pipeline distribution for streaming inputs.

Comparison with Prim's algorithm

Prim's algorithm constructs a minimum spanning tree (MST) for a connected, undirected graph by starting from an arbitrary vertex and iteratively adding the minimum-weight edge that connects a vertex in the current tree to one outside it, maintaining a priority queue of candidate edges adjacent to the growing subtree. This local, vertex-centric expansion contrasts with Kruskal's global strategy, which sorts all edges by weight and greedily adds the smallest that does not form a cycle, using a union-find structure to track connected components. While Kruskal processes the entire edge set independently of vertex selection, Prim builds the tree incrementally from a seed vertex, focusing on the frontier of unexplored adjacent edges.
In terms of data structures, Kruskal relies on union-find for efficient cycle detection and component merging, whereas Prim uses a priority queue to extract the minimum edge from the set of fringe edges, enabling dynamic updates as the tree expands. Both achieve O(E log V) time complexity with optimized implementationsKruskal via sorting and nearly constant-time union-find operations, and Prim via binary heap-based priority queuebut Prim can improve to O(E + V log V) with Fibonacci heaps, favoring it in dense graphs where the number of edges E approaches V. Conversely, Kruskal excels in sparse graphs with fewer edges, as the initial sorting cost O(E log E) remains low relative to Prim's per-vertex operations.
Kruskal is simpler to apply to disconnected graphs, naturally yielding a minimum spanning forest by including all components without modification, while Prim requires separate invocations on each connected component to achieve the same result and assumes connectivity from a single starting vertex. Their correctness stems from shared foundational properties: the greedy choice property, ensuring safe edge additions, and the cut property, which guarantees that the lightest edge across any cut in the graph belongs to some MST, allowing both algorithms to build an optimal solution step by step.
Kruskal's algorithm was first described in 1956 by Joseph B. Kruskal in the Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, with Prim's formulation following in 1957 by Robert C. Prim in the Bell System Technical Journal. In contemporary contexts like streaming or distributed graphs, where edges arrive incrementally, Kruskal's edge-focused processing offers advantages for adaptation, such as handling unsorted streams with approximate sorting, highlighting trade-offs beyond classical sparse-versus-dense distinctions. Recent works (20242025) have extended this to incremental MST algorithms that efficiently handle graph updates using variants of Kruskal's greedy selection.

References

4.3 Minimum Spanning Trees - Algorithms, 4th Edition

Kruskal's Algorithm - cs.wisc.edu

 Greedy Algorithms

 Minimum Spanning Trees

18.1 Networks and Minimal Spanning Trees

Minimum Spanning Tree -- from Wolfram MathWorld

 On the history of the minimum spanning tree problem. - UCSD Math

 Applications of minimum spanning trees

6.3 minimum-spanning-tree problem - MIT

Efficiency of a Good But Not Linear Set Union Algorithm

 Kruskal's algorithm

 Kruskal's Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm & Union-Find Data ...

 CSE 421: Introduction to Algorithms - Washington

 Greedy Algorithms

 Chapter 12 Greedy Algorithms for Minimum Spanning Trees

 nave linking link-by-size link-by-rank path compression ...

Minimum spanning trees - UC Irvine

Time and Space Complexity Analysis of Kruskal Algorithm

 A Review on Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithms - IJSRD.com

 Kruskal's Algorithm: Correctness Analysis

 Kruskal's Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm & Union-Find Data ...

 4.3 MINIMUM SPANNING TREES | Algorithms - cs.Princeton

 Greedy Algorithms

 CS245-2017S-18 Spanning Trees - Data Structures and Algorithms

 Minimum Spanning Trees and Greedy Algorithms - Washington

Parallel BGL Minimum Spanning Tree - Boost

 Shortest Connection Networks And Some Generalizations

Kruskal's vs Prim's Algorithm | Baeldung on Computer Science

 State-of-the-Art Algorithms for Minimum Spanning Trees

Minimum Spanning Tree: The Cut Property - Baeldung

 kruskal-1956.pdf

 Adaptive PrimKruskal (APK): A Hybrid Density - JETIR.org
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion