Leap Years Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 8 days ago 
Leap Years
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A leap year is a year in the Gregorian calendar that contains 366 days rather than the standard 365, achieved by inserting an additional day, February 29, to account for the fractional portion of the solar year. This adjustment ensures that the calendar remains synchronized with the Earth's orbit around the Sun, which averages approximately 365.2425 days. Under the Gregorian rules, a year is a leap year if it is evenly divisible by 4, except for century years (divisible by 100), which are not leap years unless they are also divisible by 400. For example, the year 2000 was a leap year because it is divisible by 400, while 1900 was not.
The concept of leap years originated with the Julian calendar, introduced by Julius Caesar in 45 BCE, which added a leap day every four years to approximate the solar year, resulting in an average length of 365.25 days. However, this overestimation caused a gradual drift of about one day every 128 years, leading to seasonal misalignment, such as the vernal equinox shifting earlier over centuries. To correct this, Pope Gregory XIII promulgated the Gregorian calendar reform in 1582 through the papal bull Inter gravissimas, which refined the leap year rule and omitted 10 days (October 514) from the calendar to realign the equinox with March 21 for accurate computation of Easter. The Gregorian calendar was gradually adopted worldwide, becoming the international civil standard by the 20th century.
Leap years play a critical role in astronomy, timekeeping, and civil administration, influencing everything from date calculations in software to religious observances and fiscal planning. While most modern calendars follow Gregorian rules, variations exist in other systems, such as the Hebrew calendar's occasional addition of an extra month. The next Gregorian leap year after 2024 will be 2028, with century exceptions ensuring long-term accuracy until the year 4900.

Definition and Purpose

Core Concept

A leap year is a calendar year that contains 366 days rather than the standard 365, achieved by inserting an additional day known as February 29. This extra day serves to adjust for the fractional length of the solar year, which is approximately 365.2425 days, preventing the calendar from gradually drifting out of alignment with the seasons.
In contrast to common years, which consist of exactly 365 days divided among 12 months, there are 1095 days in 3 years (3 365 days, excluding leap days). If one leap year is included, the total is 1096 days. Leap years extend February from 28 to 29 days, thereby adding the single intercalary day at the conclusion of the shortest month. This one-day addition occurs periodically, on average every four years, to approximate the solar year's excess over a full integer number of days and ensure that dates remain consistent with astronomical events like equinoxes.
The core function of leap years lies in their role as a simple yet effective mechanism for calendar synchronization, balancing the discrete structure of human timekeeping with the continuous motion of Earth around the Sun. Without such periodic insertions, a 365-day calendar would accumulate an error of about one day every four years, eventually shifting seasonal markers by months over centuries.

Astronomical Justification

The sidereal year, defined as the time Earth takes to complete one orbit around the Sun relative to the fixed stars, measures approximately 365.256363 days. However, for calendar purposes, the tropical year is more relevant, as it represents the period between successive vernal equinoxes and governs the cycle of seasons; this duration is approximately 365.24219 days in the modern era. The slight difference arises from Earth's axial precession, which causes the equinox points to shift gradually against the stellar background, making the tropical year shorter than the sidereal year.
Without periodic adjustments like leap years, a calendar fixed at 365 days would accumulate a drift of about 0.24219 days per year relative to the tropical year. This excess equates to roughly one full day every four years, leading to progressive misalignment between calendar dates and astronomical seasons. Over centuries, such drift would cause significant seasonal shifts; for instance, if unadjusted, the calendar would advance by approximately 182 days after about 750 years, placing summer in the Northern Hemisphere during what is currently December.
Leap years address this discrepancy by adding an extra day periodically, ensuring the calendar remains synchronized with the tropical year and key astronomical events such as the vernal equinox and solstices. This alignment is crucial for maintaining the practical utility of the calendar in agriculture, navigation, and seasonal activities, preventing the gradual decoupling of civil time from Earth's orbital position.

Historical Development

Pre-Gregorian Systems

The ancient Egyptian civil calendar was a solar system comprising 365 days, structured as 12 months of 30 days each followed by 5 epagomenal days, without any mechanism for leap years. This fixed length caused the calendar to drift relative to the tropical solar year of approximately 365.25 days, resulting in a lag of about one day every four years. Over time, this misalignment shifted seasons through the months, but the Egyptians observed a natural realignment via the Sothic cyclea 1,460-year period aligned with the heliacal rising of Sirius (Sothis), during which the calendar would fully cycle back into synchronization with astronomical events.
In the Roman Republic, the calendar was primarily lunar, with 355 days in a basic year, requiring periodic adjustments to match the solar cycle. An intercalary month called Mercedonius, lasting 27 or 28 days, was theoretically inserted every two years after February 23, effectively splitting and extending February to bridge the gap. However, the pontifices, who controlled the calendar, frequently added or omitted this month irregularly for political advantage, such as prolonging office terms or delaying elections, which led to severe driftsby the late Republic, the calendar had fallen about three months behind the seasons.
Ancient Greek city-states, including Athens, employed lunisolar calendars that tracked lunar months of 29 or 30 days while aiming to align with the solar year for agricultural purposes. To prevent excessive drift, they incorporated embolismic monthsextra intercalary months added occasionally, often every two or three yearsextending the year to approximately 384 days when needed. This adjustment was determined by religious and civic authorities based on observations of the equinoxes or solstices, ensuring festivals and harvests remained seasonally appropriate, though the exact timing varied by polis and was not strictly formalized until later cycles like Meton's 19-year system in the 5th century BCE.

Julian Calendar Introduction

The Julian calendar was introduced in 45 BCE by Julius Caesar as a comprehensive reform of the Roman calendar, which had become severely misaligned with the solar year due to irregular intercalations in prior systems. Advised by the Alexandrian astronomer Sosigenes, Caesar established a solar-based calendar averaging 365.25 days per year to better synchronize civil dates with astronomical seasons. This reform shifted from the predominantly lunar-oriented Republican calendar to a more precise structure, incorporating fixed month lengths and eliminating discretionary priestly adjustments.
To implement the new system and correct accumulated discrepancies, Caesar extended the year 46 BCE to 445 days by inserting two additional monthsIntercalaris Prior and Intercalaris Posteriorbetween November and December, effectively adding 67 days and realigning the calendar so that 45 BCE began on January 1. The core leap year mechanism specified an extra day, known as the bissextus, inserted every fourth year immediately before the last five days of February, thereby creating a 366-day year in those cycles and maintaining the 365.25-day average. This rule, divisible by four without exception at the time, provided a straightforward method to account for the fractional day in the solar year.
While the Julian calendar immediately stabilized Roman timekeeping and facilitated consistent agricultural and civic planning, its assumption of exactly 365.25 days slightly overestimated the tropical year's length of approximately 365.2422 days, resulting in an overcompensation of about 0.0078 days per year. Over 400 years, this discrepancy accumulated to roughly three extra days, gradually causing seasonal drift despite the initial alignment achieved in 45 BCE.

Gregorian Calendar Reform

By the 16th century, the Julian calendar's average year length of 365.25 days exceeded the tropical solar year of approximately 365.2422 days, resulting in an accumulated error of about three days every 400 years. This discrepancy had shifted the vernal equinox from its intended date of March 21established by the Council of Nicaea in 325 for Easter calculationsto around March 11 by 1582, threatening the accuracy of determining Easter as the first Sunday after the first full moon following the equinox. To address this drift and restore alignment for religious observances, Pope Gregory XIII commissioned a reform based on proposals from astronomers Aloysius Lilius and Christoph Clavius.
The reforms, promulgated via the papal bull Inter gravissimas on February 24, 1582, introduced two principal changes. First, to immediately correct the 10-day lag, Thursday, October 4, 1582, was followed directly by Friday, October 15, 1582, effectively omitting the intervening dates. Second, the leap year rule was refined to better approximate the solar year: years divisible by 4 remain leap years, but century years (divisible by 100) are excluded unless also divisible by 400, reducing the error to about one day every 3,300 years. This adjustment meant, for example, that 1700, 1800, and 1900 would not be leap years, while 1600 and 2000 would.
Adoption of the Gregorian calendar proceeded unevenly due to religious and political divisions. It was implemented immediately in Catholic states such as Italy, Spain, Portugal, and parts of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1582. Protestant regions resisted longer, with much of Germany and the Netherlands adopting it in the early 17th century; Great Britain and its colonies followed in 1752, skipping 11 days by then due to further drift. Eastern Orthodox countries delayed even more: Russia switched in 1918 following the Bolshevik Revolution, and Greece in 1923, marking the last major European adoption.

Determination Rules

Gregorian Leap Year Criteria

In the Gregorian calendar, a year is designated as a leap year if it is evenly divisible by 4, which adds an extra dayFebruary 29to align the calendar more closely with the Earth's orbital period around the Sun. This rule applies universally to years in the common era, ensuring that most years divisible by 4, such as 2024, include 366 days instead of the standard 365.
However, century yearsthose ending in 00introduce exceptions to this primary rule for greater precision. A century year is not a leap year unless it is also divisible by 400; for instance, 1700, 1800, and 1900 were not leap years, while 1600 and 2000 were. This adjustment skips three leap years every 400 years compared to a simpler every-4-years system, preventing gradual drift from the solar year.
These criteria result in an average Gregorian calendar year length of 365.2425 days, which approximates the tropical year (the time between vernal equinoxes) to within about half a minute. Over long periods, this yields an accuracy of roughly one day every 3,300 years, maintaining synchronization with astronomical seasons far better than its predecessor.
To illustrate, 2024 qualifies as a leap year because it is divisible by 4 and not a century year, whereas 2025 does not, as it fails the divisibility test. Similarly, 2100 will not be a leap year, being a century year not divisible by 400.

Julian Leap Year Criteria

The Julian calendar determines leap years through a uniform rule: a year is a leap year if it is evenly divisible by 4, with no exceptions applied to century years or other adjustments. This simple criterion was introduced in 45 BCE as part of the calendar's reform under Julius Caesar, aiming to approximate the solar year by adding an extra day periodically.
In such leap years, the additional day is inserted as February 29, extending February from 28 to 29 days and maintaining the calendar's structure of 12 months totaling 366 days. This placement ensures continuity with the non-leap year's progression while aligning seasons more closely with astronomical cycles.
This approach yields an average year length of 365.25 days, as the leap day occurs once every four years. However, since the tropical year measures approximately 365.2422 days, the Julian system overestimates by about 0.0078 days annually, resulting in a cumulative drift of roughly 3 days every 400 years relative to the equinoxes and solstices.
The Julian calendar persists in select applications today, including its use by certain Eastern Orthodox churches to determine dates for fixed feasts, where liturgical observances remain tied to its unchanging structure. It also influences some traditional calculations in East Asian lunisolar calendars, which incorporate solar year approximations akin to the Julian mean for aligning lunar months with seasons. In contrast, the Gregorian calendar refines this by skipping leap years in most century years not divisible by 400, reducing the drift.

Variations in Other Calendars

The Hebrew calendar, a lunisolar system, employs leap years to reconcile the approximately 354-day lunar year with the 365.25-day solar year. It adheres to the 19-year Metonic cycle, during which 7 leap years occur, each featuring an additional month (Adar II) to extend the year to 13 months and totaling 383 to 385 days. These leap years fall in the 3rd, 6th, 8th, 11th, 14th, 17th, and 19th positions of the cycle, a pattern derived from ancient Babylonian astronomy and retained in Jewish tradition since antiquity. This structure ensures that holidays like Passover remain in spring, preventing seasonal drift.
In opposition to solar-aligned systems, the Islamic calendar is strictly lunar, consisting of 12 months totaling 354 or 355 days with no provision for leap years. Without intercalary adjustments, it drifts backward by about 10 to 12 days each solar year relative to the seasons, completing a full cycle through the Gregorian calendar every 32 to 33 years. This intentional design emphasizes the moon's phases for determining month starts via crescent sightings, prioritizing religious events like Ramadan over seasonal consistency, which results in the holiday shifting across summer, winter, and other times annually.
The traditional Chinese calendar, also lunisolar, incorporates leap months rather than days to maintain harmony between lunar cycles and solar progression. An extra month, named after the preceding lunar month, is added approximately every three yearsspecifically 7 times within a 19-year cyclewhen a lunar month passes without encompassing a principal solar term (one of the 12 major markers among the 24 solar terms that divide the year based on the sun's position). This method, rooted in ancient astronomical observations, ensures that key festivals align with seasonal phenomena, such as the winter solstice falling in the 11th month. Leap years thus extend the calendar to 13 months and 384 or 385 days, preserving agricultural and cultural ties to the solar year.
Certain Eastern Orthodox churches, including those in Constantinople, Greece, and Romania, adopt the Revised Julian calendar for fixed feasts, which modifies the original Julian rules to approximate the Gregorian system's accuracy. Under its provisions, a year is a leap year if divisible by 4, but century years are excluded unless they yield a remainder of 200 or 600 when divided by 900, yielding an average year length of 365.242222 days. This formulation coincides with Gregorian leap years through the 27th century, diverging first in 2800, when the Revised Julian treats it as a common year while the Gregorian includes February 29. The calendar's implementation, formalized in 1923, reflects efforts to align Orthodox computations with modern solar observations without fully adopting the Gregorian reform.

Calculation Methods

Basic Algorithms

The basic algorithms for identifying leap years rely on simple divisibility checks, providing procedural methods suitable for manual calculation or basic programming without requiring advanced mathematics. In the Julian calendar, the algorithm is the simplest: a given year is a leap year if and only if it is evenly divisible by 4. This rule, introduced in 45 B.C., adds one extra day every four years to approximate the solar year length of 365.25 days.
The Gregorian calendar refines this approach to correct for accumulated errors in the Julian system, using a three-step process to determine leap status:

Check if the year modulo 4 equals 0; if not, the year is not a leap year.

If the year is divisible by 4 but the year modulo 100 does not equal 0, then it is a leap year.

If the year is divisible by 100, it is a leap year only if the year modulo 400 equals 0; otherwise, it is not.

This procedure ensures an average year length of 365.2425 days, closer to the tropical year. These steps align with the Gregorian leap year criteria outlined in the calendar's foundational rules.
A common way to express the Gregorian algorithm in pseudocode, suitable for implementation in various programming languages, is as follows:
if (year % 4 == 0 && (year % 100 != 0 || year % 400 == 0)) {
 return true; // It is a leap year
} else {
 return false; // It is not a leap year
}
 This conditional logic efficiently captures the divisibility conditions without nested branches.
Edge cases arise when extending these algorithms to non-standard years, such as in the proleptic Gregorian calendar, which applies the rules retroactively before 1582. In this system, year 0 (corresponding to 1 B.C.) is treated as a leap year, as it satisfies the modulo 400 condition (0 % 400 == 0). Negative years, used in astronomical contexts, are handled by applying the same divisibility rules directly to the year number.

Modular Arithmetic Approach

The modular arithmetic approach to leap year determination in the Gregorian calendar uses the modulo operation (%) to assess divisibility conditions that approximate the tropical year's length of approximately 365.2422 days. The basic rule, inherited from the Julian calendar, adds a leap day to years where the year number satisfies year % 4 == 0, effectively modeling an average year of 365 + 1/4 = 365.25 days to account for the quarter-day excess in the solar year.
To refine this approximation and better align with the observed tropical year, the Gregorian reform introduces adjustments via modulo 100 and modulo 400. The complete condition for a leap year is: (year % 4 == 0) && !(year % 100 == 0 && year % 400 != 0). This excludes most century years (divisible by 100 but not by 400) from being leap years, reducing the frequency of leap years from 100 per 400 years (under the Julian rule) to 97 per 400 years, thereby shortening the average year length.
The resulting frequency of leap years is 97/400, yielding an average Gregorian year of
365+97400=365.2425 365 + \frac{97}{400} = 365.2425 365+40097=365.2425
days, which closely matches the tropical year approximation used in the reform.
This accuracy is demonstrated over a 400-year cycle, where the total number of days is
400365+97=146,097, 400 \times 365 + 97 = 146{,}097, 400365+97=146,097,
an average of 365.2425 days per year that aligns closely with 400 tropical years totaling approximately 146,096.88 days.

Practical Implications

Effects on Dates and Scheduling

In leap years, February is extended to 29 days by the addition of February 29, which only exists in such years and directly affects the sequential numbering of dates in the calendar. For example, March 1 follows immediately after February 29, shifting the alignment of all subsequent dates by one day relative to non-leap years and influencing the overall flow of the annual calendar.
This extra day plays a role in the calculation of movable holidays, particularly Easter in the Christian tradition, where the date is set as the first Sunday after the Paschal full moonthe ecclesiastical approximation of the first full moon on or after March 21. Leap years can subtly alter this by adding a day to the year, which impacts the Metonic cycle of 19 years used to predict lunar phases and may result in Easter falling one day later in affected cycles under the Gregorian rules. Secular customs tied to leap day include traditions like women proposing marriage on February 29, a practice originating in 5th-century Ireland from a legendary pact between St. Brigid and St. Patrick, later spreading to Scotland and other regions where it is still observed in some communities.
Long-term scheduling for recurring events often aligns with the four-year leap cycle for simplicity, as seen with the modern Olympic Games, which have been held every four years since 1896 (a leap year) and often coincide with leap years, though the extra February day has no direct bearing on summer event planning. Multi-year contracts, such as those in business or agriculture, similarly follow standard calendar cycles without routine adjustments for the leap day, relying instead on the overall alignment it provides.
Ultimately, leap years serve to preserve seasonal consistency for holidays and observances by compensating for the solar year's length of approximately 365.2422 days, preventing a gradual drift that would otherwise move fixed dates like Christmas or solstice-related festivals out of their expected seasons over centuries. This adjustment ensures that events remain tied to natural phenomena, such as equinoxes, despite the calendar's civil structure.

Impact on Birthdays and Legal Matters

Individuals born on February 29, known as leaplings, leapers, or leapsters, represent a rare occurrence, comprising approximately 1 in 1,461 births due to the infrequency of leap years. In non-leap years, leaplings typically celebrate their birthdays on either February 28 or March 1, with preferences varying by personal or cultural choice; for instance, some opt for February 28 to maintain proximity to the actual date, while others choose March 1 for a forward-looking approach.
Legal conventions for leapling birthdays differ by jurisdiction but generally prioritize practical age calculation in non-leap years to ensure consistency in rights and obligations. In many places, including parts of the United States, February 29 birthdays are treated as occurring on March 1 for determining age-related milestones such as eligibility for contracts, voting, or driver's licenses, preventing disputes over timing. For example, in California, the Government Code equates February 29 with the preceding day, effectively recognizing February 28 for certain legal purposes in non-leap years, though some states allow flexibility between February 28 and March 1.
Notable historical figures born on February 29 include Italian composer Gioachino Rossini (17921868), renowned for operas like The Barber of Seville, and Pope Paul III (14681549), who commissioned Michelangelo's Last Judgment. These leaplings highlight the diverse achievements possible despite the rarity of their birth date, with modern examples like motivational speaker Tony Robbins (born 1960) adding to the legacy.
Leapling birthdays have inspired cultural tropes in media, often portraying them as quirky or eternally youthful characters facing humorous scheduling dilemmas. A prominent example is the 30 Rock episode "Leap Day," which features the fictional "Leap Day William," a Santa Claus-like figure who celebrates only every four years, satirizing the infrequency and festivity of the occasion.
In insurance and finance, leapling birthdays can necessitate adjustments to policies tied to age, such as life insurance premiums or annuity maturity dates, which may use an effective birthday of March 1 in non-leap years to standardize calculations and avoid discrepancies in eligibility or payouts.

Role in Computing and Software

In computing and software systems, accurate handling of leap years is essential for date and time calculations, often implemented through specialized libraries that adhere to the Gregorian calendar rules. For instance, Python's standard library includes the calendar.isleap(year) function, which returns True if the given year is a leap year according to the proleptic Gregorian calendarmeaning the rules are applied indefinitely in both past and future directions, as defined in the module's documentation based on "Calendrical Calculations" by Dershowitz and Reingold. Similarly, Java's java.time.Year.isLeap() method checks for leap years using the same criteria: a year divisible by 4 but not by 100 unless also by 400, aligned with the ISO 8601 standard's proleptic Gregorian system for consistent application across timelines. These functions prevent errors in applications ranging from scheduling software to financial systems by ensuring February has 29 days in qualifying years.
Leap days interact with time zone handling and daylight saving time (DST) transitions in software, as the extra day can shift date-based rules for clock adjustments. UTC-based systems must account for leap days to maintain precise timestamps, particularly when DST starts or ends on dates affected by February 29, such as in regions where transitions occur in March; failure to do so can lead to off-by-one errors in local time conversions or event scheduling. For example, in 2024, Kazakhstan's time zone shift on leap day extended February 29 to 25 hours, highlighting how software clocks require robust calendar models to synchronize accurately during such anomalies.
Historical bugs underscore the challenges of leap year implementation in early computing. A notable issue arose in spreadsheet software like Excel, which incorrectly treats 1900 as a leap year due to compatibility with Lotus 1-2-3's serial date system, which simplified calculations by assuming divisibility by 4 without century exceptionseffectively applying a Julian-like rule. This legacy error persists to avoid disrupting existing formulas but affects functions like WEEKDAY for pre-1900 dates. Modern standards mitigate such problems; ISO 8601 mandates the proleptic Gregorian calendar, ensuring leap year rules (including century exceptions) are applied uniformly, even retroactively before 1582, to standardize data exchange in software.
For future-proofing, the Gregorian leap year rules remain valid indefinitely, with no official changes planned beyond the year 4000, though the calendar's approximation of the tropical year (365.2425 days) will gradually drift by about one day every 3,300 years after that point. Year 4000 will be a leap year as it is divisible by 400, but proposals like John Herschel's unadopted 4,000-year ruleomitting leap days in years divisible by 4,000 to refine accuracyhave not been implemented, leaving current software libraries equipped to handle distant futures without modification.

Global and Cultural Aspects

Adoption Across Cultures

The adoption of the Gregorian calendar, including its leap year rules, began in Catholic-majority countries of Europe following Pope Gregory XIII's papal bull Inter gravissimas in 1582, with immediate implementation in realms such as Spain, Portugal, the Papal States, and parts of the Holy Roman Empire, where October 4 was followed directly by October 15 to align with the new system. Protestant regions resisted due to anti-papal sentiments, delaying adoption; for instance, the German states and Scandinavia transitioned gradually between 1700 and 1753. By 1752, Great Britain and its colonies, including parts of North America, fully switched via the Calendar (New Style) Act 1750, skipping 11 days in September to synchronize with the Gregorian framework.
European colonial expansion further disseminated the Gregorian calendar globally, imposing it on territories in Africa, Asia, and the Americas as administrative standards for governance, trade, and record-keeping, often overriding local systems. In non-Western contexts, Japan adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1873 during the Meiji Restoration as part of modernization efforts to align with international norms, marking the start of the year on January 1. China followed in 1912 with the establishment of the Republic, using it for official civil purposes alongside the traditional lunisolar calendar for cultural events. British India transitioned in 1752 alongside the metropole, embedding the system in colonial bureaucracy that persisted post-independence. More recently, Saudi Arabia mandated the Gregorian calendar for civil transactions, such as salary payments and official documentation, starting in 2016 to streamline fiscal operations, while retaining the Hijri calendar for religious matters.
Despite widespread civil adoption, resistance persists in religious and cultural spheres; Eastern Orthodox churches, including those in Russia, Serbia, and Georgia, continue to use the Julian calendar for liturgical dates like Easter and Christmas, maintaining a 13-day lag from the Gregorian to preserve ecclesiastical traditions. Some indigenous communities, such as certain Native American tribes and South American ethnolinguistic groups, uphold traditional lunar or biocultural calendars tied to seasonal cycles and ecological knowledge, employing them for ceremonies and resource management even as they navigate Gregorian civil requirements. Today, the Gregorian calendar serves as the civil standard in nearly all countries worldwide, encompassing the vast majority of the world's population, though dual systems remain prevalent in religious or cultural contexts to accommodate diverse practices.

Leap Years in Non-Western Calendars

The Indian National Calendar, also known as the Saka calendar, is a solar calendar officially adopted in India in 1957 and aligned with the Gregorian calendar for civil purposes. It follows the tropical year of approximately 365.2425 days, with leap years determined by adding 78 to the Saka year and applying the Gregorian leap year rules to the resulting sum: a year is a leap year if divisible by 4, unless divisible by 100 but not by 400. In leap years, an extra day is added to the month of Chaitra, making it 31 days instead of 30, which ensures seasonal alignment with the Saka era's epoch starting in 78 CE. This system maintains synchronization with astronomical seasons while incorporating the Saka historical framework.
The Persian calendar, or Solar Hijri calendar, is another solar system originating from ancient Iranian traditions and reformed in 1925 for precision, tracking the tropical year through the moment of the vernal equinox at the Tehran meridian. Leap years are calculated astronomically to add an extra day when the time between equinoxes exceeds 365 days, resulting in a highly accurate average year length of about 365.24219879 days over long cycles. A common approximation uses a 33-year subcycle, where leap years occur in years whose remainder when divided by 33 is 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, 22, 26, or 30, integrated within larger 2820-year cycles that include 683 leap years to minimize drift. This method, rooted in medieval astronomical computations, ensures the calendar remains closely tied to solar events without fixed arithmetic like the Gregorian proleptic rule.
In contrast, the Mayan calendar system, used by Mesoamerican civilizations, lacks direct leap year mechanisms and instead relies on interlocking cycles for timekeeping. The Haab', a 365-day civil calendar, consists of 18 months of 20 days plus a 5-day Wayeb' period, but it does not intercalate extra days, leading to a gradual drift of about 1 day every 4 years relative to the solar year. Adjustments occur through larger structures like the Long Count, a linear vigesimal tally of days from a mythological starting point in 3114 BCE, which accumulates exact days without periodic corrections, and the 52-year Calendar Round combining the 260-day Tzolk'in ritual cycle with the Haab' for recurring alignments. This ritual-focused approach prioritizes cyclical harmony over precise solar synchronization.
The Ethiopian calendar, closely related to the Coptic calendar and derived from the ancient Egyptian solar tradition, structures the year into 12 months of 30 days plus a 13th short month of 5 or 6 days, following Julian leap year rules without Gregorian century exceptions. Leap years occur every 4 years, adding a sixth day to the Pagum month (equivalent to Coptic Nasie), which results in an average year of 365.25 days and causes a slow divergence from the Gregorian calendar over centuries. This system, with its epoch 7-8 years behind the Gregorian due to differences in calculating the Annunciation, maintains consistency with Orthodox Christian liturgical needs while aligning broadly with Julian precedents from 25 BCE.

References

Gregorian Calendar: The World's Standard Calendar - Time and Date

Leap Years

Introduction to Calendars

Is 2025 a Leap Year? - Time and Date

Leap Day Is Here: It Doesn't Have to Be Your Standard Weekday

Julian to Gregorian Calendar: How We Lost 10 Days - Time and Date

 Calendars - Astronomical Applications Department

The Jewish or Hebrew Leap Year - Time and Date

The Science of Leap Year | National Air and Space Museum

PPT Slide

What exactly is a leap year? - University of Miami News

2028 Is a Leap Year! When Are Leap Years and Why Do We Have ...

https://www.britannica.com/science/sidereal-year

How Long Is a Tropical Year / Solar Year? - Time and Date

What Is a Leap Year? | NASA Space Place

Explainer: the science behind leap years and how they work

Why do we have leap years? | BBC Science Focus

Why do we need leap years? Astrophysicists explain this month's ...

Sothic cycle - Oxford Reference

The Egyptian Civil Calendar: a Masterpiece to Organize the Cosmos

Intercalation

Plutarch on Caesar's calendar reform - Livius.org

The Julian calendar takes effect for the first time on New Year's Day

Caesar's reform of the calendar some ancient sources

Lecture 11: The Calendar

Calendar Calculations

Gregorian Calendar - The Galileo Project | Chronology

 THE 400TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE GREGORIAN CALENDAR

Calendars

Calendars and their History - NASA Eclipse

The Calendar Astronomy - Maricopa Open Digital Press

rules for leap year

Lecture 4. The Copernicans. Calendar Problems

Leap Years, Explained - Georgia Institute of Technology

What's up with leap years? ScIU - IU Blogs

Jordan: The Chinese Calendar

5777 and all that - Harvard Mathematics Department

Lecture 11: The Calendar

Islamic calendar

The Chinese Calendar - Time and Date

The Chinese created a lunar calendar based on the cycles ... - eCUIP

Revised Julian Calendar - OrthodoxWiki

The Gregorian calendar

Method to determine whether a year is a leap year - Microsoft Learn

 The Application of Modular Arithmetic in Determining a Leap Year

The Gregorian calendar - Royal Observatory of Belgium

How does leap day work? Your every-four-years refresher - NPR

When is Easter? - Royal Museums Greenwich

Origins and Lore of Leap Day | Folklife Magazine

Leap year: ladies' choice - Penrose Library - Whitman College

Why are the Olympic Games held every four years?

The mathematical muddle created by leap years - BBC

The science of leap day: How it works, why we do it, and when we ...

Famous people born on Leap Day: How many people have Feb ...

When do leap day babies celebrate their birthdays? - Time and Date

The leap year and the law | Legal Blog

Leap year birthdays and legal age - One Legal

Famous Birthdays on February 29 - On This Day

12 Famous Figures Born on February 29 - Mental Floss

'Leap Day Lore': Superstitions, myths and pop culture references ...

calendar General calendar-related functions Python 3.14.0 ...

Year (Java Platform SE 8 ) - Oracle Help Center

Handling Local Timezones, UTC, Daylight Savings Time, and Leap ...

Kazakhstan and the 25-Hour Leap Day - Types & Times

Excel incorrectly assumes that the year 1900 is a leap year

ISO8601 calendar system - Java date and time API - Joda.org

The Gregorian Calendar Adopted in England - History Today

When Did East Asian Countries Adopt the Western Calendar and ...

What Calendar Do We Use? | All about the Gregorian Calendar

Indian Calendar - Webexhibits

 The development of Iranian calendar: historical and astronomical ...

The Maya Calendar Explained - Maya Archaeologist - Dr Diane Davies

The Ethiopic Calendar - geez.org
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion