Lemmatization Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Lemmatization
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Lemmatization is a fundamental process in natural language processing (NLP) that involves reducing inflected or irregularly derived words to their base or dictionary form, known as the lemma, which represents the canonical or citation form of the word. Unlike stemming, which applies heuristic rules to truncate words to a common root regardless of linguistic validity, lemmatization relies on morphological analysis, part-of-speech tagging, and contextual information to ensure the output is a genuine dictionary entry. For instance, the inflected forms "running," "runs," and "ran" are all mapped to the lemma "run," while "better" lemmatizes to "good" based on its comparative derivation.
This technique is essential for text normalization in NLP pipelines, where it standardizes vocabulary to improve the efficiency and accuracy of downstream tasks such as information retrieval, machine translation, and sentiment analysis. By grouping morphological variants under a single lemma, lemmatization reduces data sparsity and dimensionality in feature representations, enabling more robust machine learning models, particularly in morphologically rich languages like Russian or Basque that exhibit extensive inflectional paradigms. The process typically employs lexicon-based methods, such as those leveraging resources like WordNet, or rule-based systems that incorporate syntactic context to resolve ambiguities, as outlined in foundational NLP frameworks.
In practice, lemmatization algorithms, including those implemented in libraries like NLTK's WordNetLemmatizer, first perform part-of-speech tagging to disambiguate formse.g., treating "saw" as a verb lemma ("see") rather than a noun ("saw")before applying transformation rules derived from linguistic knowledge. Its applications extend to search engines, where it enhances query matching by normalizing user inputs, and to corpus linguistics for consistent querying across large datasets. Despite advances in neural contextual embeddings that can implicitly handle morphology, explicit lemmatization remains valuable for interpretable preprocessing and performance in low-resource scenarios.

Fundamentals

Definition

Lemmatization is the process of reducing the inflected or derived forms of words to their canonical or dictionary form, known as the lemma, typically by considering the part-of-speech (POS) context of the word. This normalization technique groups variant word formssuch as plurals, tenses, or comparative adjectivesinto a single base representation, facilitating consistent analysis in natural language processing tasks. For instance, it transforms "running" into "run" or "better" into "good," ensuring that semantically related variants are treated uniformly without altering the word's core meaning.
In linguistics, the lemma is defined as the base or citation form of a word, as it appears as the headword in dictionaries and serves to represent all its inflected variants. Lemmatization draws on morphological analysis, the study of word structure, to handle inflectional morphologysuch as adding "-s" for plurals or "-ed" for past tensesand, in some cases, derivational changes. This process ensures that words are mapped to valid dictionary entries rather than arbitrary truncations, promoting accuracy in linguistic computations.
Lemmatization evolved from foundational work in morphological processing during the 1950s machine translation projects, where normalizing word forms was essential for handling linguistic variations across languages. A basic workflow for lemmatization involves inputting a word along with its POS tag to determine the appropriate lemma; for example, "saw" lemmatizes to "see" when tagged as a verb (past tense of "to see") but remains "saw" as a noun (referring to a tool). This POS dependency distinguishes lemmatization from simpler normalization methods like stemming, which may not account for contextual meaning.

Comparison to Stemming

Stemming is a heuristic process in natural language processing that reduces words to their root or base form by truncating suffixes, aiming to normalize related word variants for tasks like information retrieval. A seminal example is the Porter Stemmer algorithm, introduced in 1980, which applies a series of rules to remove common English suffixes such as "-ing", "-ed", and "-s" to produce a common stem, often without regard for linguistic validity.
In contrast to lemmatization, which relies on vocabulary analysis and morphological rules to map words to their canonical dictionary form (lemma) while considering context like part-of-speech, stemming operates through simpler, rule-based truncation that can result in non-words. For instance, stemming might reduce "university" to "univers", an invalid form, whereas lemmatization preserves it as "university" since it is already the base noun. This makes stemming faster and less computationally intensive but prone to over-stemming (grouping unrelated words, e.g., "university" and "universe") or under-stemming (failing to group related words). Lemmatization, often requiring part-of-speech tagging for accuracy, produces valid words but demands more resources.
Lemmatization typically achieves higher precision in normalization tasks due to its morphological awareness, often showing modest improvements in precision over stemming in English information retrieval benchmarks. Stemming, while approximate, suffices for reducing vocabulary size but introduces errors in semantic-sensitive applications.
Stemming is preferred for rapid indexing in large-scale search engines, where speed and reduced index size are critical, while lemmatization suits semantic tasks like machine translation or sentiment analysis that require exact, meaningful forms.
Input WordStemming Output (Porter)Lemmatization Output
studiesstudistudy
studyingstudistudy
feetfeetfoot

Methods

Dictionary-Based Approaches

Dictionary-based approaches to lemmatization rely on pre-built electronic dictionaries or lexical databases that map inflected word forms to their canonical base forms, known as lemmas. These methods are particularly effective for resource-rich languages like English, where comprehensive dictionaries exist. A seminal example is WordNet, a lexical database developed at Princeton University starting in the late 1980s, which organizes English words into synsetssets of cognitive synonymsand explicitly links morphological variants, such as "dogs" to "dog" or "better" to "good," to facilitate lemmatization.
The process begins with tokenizing the input text into individual words. Each token is then looked up in the dictionary using exact matching or, in more advanced implementations, fuzzy matching to handle minor variations. To disambiguate lemmas, especially for words with multiple senses across parts of speech (POS), the approach incorporates POS information; for instance, "saw" as a verb lemmatizes to "see," while as a noun it remains "saw." Princeton WordNet, with its approximately 117,000 synsets covering nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs, supports this by providing POS-specific morphological derivations.
Early implementations in the late 1970s and early 1980s involved converting printed dictionaries into machine-readable formats, such as the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (1978), which was made available in machine-readable form around 1983 and provided structured lexical data for natural language processing tasks including inflection resolution.
These approaches offer high accuracy for words present in the dictionary due to the explicit mapping of forms to lemmas. They are also straightforward to implement, as seen in libraries like NLTK's WordNetLemmatizer, which leverages WordNet for efficient lookups without requiring custom rule development.
However, limitations include ineffective handling of out-of-vocabulary words, such as proper nouns (e.g., "Einstein" remains unchanged) or rare inflections not covered in the dictionary, leading to fallback to the original form. Additionally, these methods demand significant storage, with the WordNet database occupying around 12 MB in compressed form.
A simple pseudocode representation of the lookup process is as follows:
function lemmatize(word, pos='n'):
 if word in dictionary and pos in dictionary:
 return dictionary
 else:
 return word # fallback to original
This illustrates the reliance on dictionary presence and POS matching, with morphological analysis sometimes serving as a complementary step for unresolved cases.

Rule-Based and Morphological Methods

Rule-based and morphological methods for lemmatization rely on linguistic knowledge encoded as explicit rules and analyzers to decompose words into their base forms, particularly suited for handling inflection in morphologically rich languages. Morphological analysis involves breaking down words into morphemessuch as roots, prefixes, and suffixesusing finite-state transducers (FSTs), which model the mapping between surface forms and underlying lexical representations. These transducers operate via transition functions that process input symbols to produce output, formally defined as (q,a)=(q,b)\delta(q, a) = (q', b)(q,a)=(q,b), where qqq is the current state, aaa the input symbol, qq'q the next state, and bbb the output symbol. Xerox developed practical FST tools like lexc, twolc, and xfst in the 1990s for building such analyzers, enabling efficient morphological parsing and generation.
The foundations of these methods trace back to 1980s computational morphology projects, notably Kimmo Koskenniemi's two-level morphology model introduced in 1983, which uses parallel rules to constrain morpheme combinations at lexical and surface levels for recognition and production. In rule-based lemmatization, hand-crafted rules target inflectional patterns, such as stripping the "-s" suffix from English plurals (e.g., "cats" to "cat") or handling irregular verbs like "went" to "go" through dedicated transformations. These rules often integrate with part-of-speech (POS) taggers to disambiguate forms, ensuring context-aware lemma selection. Dictionary lookups serve as a baseline for validating rule outputs, confirming canonical forms against lexical entries.
The lemmatization process typically parses the word's structure to identify morphemes, applies reversal rules to strip affixes and restore the base, and selects the canonical lemma, with exception lists managing irregularities not captured by general patterns. Open-source tools like Hunspell, an affix-rule-based morphological analyzer developed in the early 2000s, exemplify this approach by supporting lemmatization alongside spell-checking for multiple languages. Such methods excel in languages with complex morphology, like German and Finnish, achieving accuracies of 85-95% on standard benchmarks due to their explicit handling of inflectional paradigms.

Machine Learning Techniques

Machine learning techniques for lemmatization primarily rely on data-driven models trained on annotated corpora to predict the base form of words, often integrating part-of-speech (POS) information to resolve ambiguities. Early statistical approaches, emerging in the 1990s, utilized Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) trained on resources like the Penn Treebanka corpus of over 4.5 million words of American English with POS and syntactic annotationsto perform sequence labeling for morphological analysis, including lemma prediction through probabilistic transitions between word forms and tags. These models treated lemmatization as a hidden state inference problem, estimating emission probabilities for inflected forms and transition probabilities across possible lemmas, enabling scalable processing of unseen words via Viterbi decoding.
Post-2010 advancements shifted toward neural architectures, with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and long short-term memory (LSTM) units enabling context-aware lemmatization by capturing sequential dependencies in sentences. For instance, bidirectional LSTMs (biLSTMs) encode input sequences of inflected words and POS tags, followed by a decoder that generates lemmas autoregressively. BERT-based lemmatizers, introduced around 2018, leverage transformer encoders pretrained on multilingual corpora to produce contextual embeddings, fine-tuned for joint POS tagging and lemmatization, achieving superior handling of polysemy and long-range dependencies compared to earlier RNNs.
The training process for these models is typically supervised, using datasets of triples consisting of inflected forms, corresponding lemmas, and POS tagsoften from Universal Dependencies (UD) treebanksto optimize a cross-entropy loss over multi-class predictions for each token's lemma. A prominent example is the lemmatizer in spaCy, which employs convolutional neural networks (CNNs) within a multi-task framework to extract morphological features from character and word embeddings, yielding accuracies exceeding 97% on UD benchmarks for languages like English and achieving over 95% for many others in multilingual settings.
Multilingual extensions, such as UDPipe introduced in 2016, support over 100 languages by training joint models for tokenization, POS tagging, lemmatization, and parsing on UD treebanks, incorporating transfer learning from high-resource languages to address low-resource challenges through shared representations and pretraining on related scripts. By 2023, integration with large language models (LLMs) like those in the GPT family enabled zero-shot lemmatization, where prompts guide the model to infer lemmas without task-specific fine-tuning, demonstrating effectiveness on classical and low-resource languages via in-context learning.

Applications

General Natural Language Processing

Lemmatization serves as a critical step in natural language processing (NLP) pipelines, where it normalizes inflected word forms to their base or dictionary form, facilitating more effective tokenization and analysis of text data. By reducing morphological variationssuch as converting "running," "runs," and "ran" to "run"lemmatization streamlines preprocessing, enabling consistent representation of words across documents. This normalization is particularly valuable in handling the variability of natural language, where a single lemma can encompass dozens of surface forms, thereby enhancing the efficiency of subsequent tasks like feature extraction and model training.
In core NLP tasks, lemmatization contributes to improved performance in information retrieval and text classification. For instance, in search engines like Elasticsearch, which has incorporated dictionary-based normalization akin to lemmatization since its initial release in 2010, it enhances recall by matching query terms to relevant document variants, allowing users to retrieve results for related inflections without exact matches. Similarly, in text classification applications such as sentiment analysis, lemmatization reduces noise in feature vectors, often improving model accuracy by several percentage points through better generalization across word forms.
Lemmatization also plays a supportive role in downstream applications, including named entity recognition (NER) and machine translation, by standardizing entity mentions and alignments. In NER, it aids in resolving variations of entity names or terms, such as linking "companies" and "company" to a unified form, which improves entity consistency and extraction precision in pipelines. For machine translation systems like Google Translate, lemmatization during preprocessing ensures consistent word alignments across languages, contributing to higher translation quality by mitigating inflectional mismatches in parallel corpora.
Evaluation of lemmatization typically involves metrics such as lemma accuracy, measured on benchmark datasets like those from the CoNLL shared tasks, where state-of-the-art models achieve accuracies exceeding 95% by correctly mapping inflected tokens to lemmas. Additionally, its impact extends to language modeling, where lemmatized inputs reduce perplexity scoresindicating better predictive uncertaintyby shrinking vocabulary size and smoothing probability distributions over word forms. This effect is evident in n-gram and neural models, where lemmatization can lower perplexity by incorporating morphological awareness as an additional smoothing mechanism.
Lemmatization is a standard component in widely used NLP libraries, reflecting its ubiquity in general text processing workflows. The Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK), initiated in 2001, integrates WordNet-based lemmatization as a core feature for vocabulary normalization in research and educational applications. Likewise, spaCy, released in 2015, embeds rule-based and lookup lemmatization directly into its efficient processing pipeline, supporting rapid deployment in production environments.

Specialized Domains like Biomedicine

In biomedicine, lemmatization addresses the unique challenges of specialized vocabularies, such as morphological variants of anatomical and pathological terms, while preserving acronyms and identifiers that lack inflectional forms. For instance, tools like BioLemmatizer normalize "tumors" to "tumor" to standardize references in clinical narratives, drawing on resources like the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), developed by the National Library of Medicine in 1986 to integrate biomedical terminologies for consistent processing. UMLS's SPECIALIST Lexicon supports this by providing lexical variants and normalization, enabling accurate handling of domain-specific inflections without altering non-inflected elements like the acronym "CT" for computed tomography.
Adaptations for biomedicine often involve custom dictionaries derived from medical ontologies, such as integrating SNOMED CT to expand coverage of clinical concepts in lemmatization pipelines. These ontologies facilitate the creation of specialized lexicons that account for hierarchical relationships in biomedical terms, improving morphological analysis in rule-based systems. Additionally, rule-based tweaks target the etymological structure of pharmacological nomenclature, which frequently derives from Latin and Greek roots; for example, BioLemmatizer employs inflectional rules to process variants like "phosphorylations" to "phosphorylation," adapting general English morphology to biomedical derivations without extensive derivational decomposition.
Key applications include clinical text mining for tasks like de-identifying electronic health records (EHRs), where lemmatization normalizes terms to reduce noise and enhance entity recognition while protecting privacy. In EHR processing, it supports the extraction of structured insights from unstructured notes, as seen in pipelines that preprocess clinical narratives for secondary analysis. For PubMed search enhancement, domain-specific lemmatization improves retrieval precision by standardizing query terms against biomedical corpora, with studies from the 2010s demonstrating substantial gains in concept matching through morphological normalization.
Domain-specific challenges arise from neologisms and abbreviations, such as variants of "COVID-19" (e.g., "COVID" or "SARS-CoV-2"), which evolve rapidly and evade standard dictionaries, complicating lemmatization in real-time clinical data. Hybrid methods combining machine learning with domain lexicons address these by leveraging UMLS or SNOMED CT for context-aware normalization, boosting accuracy for ambiguous or novel terms in biomedical texts. Tools like MetaMap, developed by the National Institutes of Health in the 2000s, exemplify this through UMLS-based mapping that incorporates normalization steps akin to lemmatization, though evaluations on datasets like MIMIC-III highlight variability in performance for concept extraction (F-scores around 0.20-0.28). BioLemmatizer, in contrast, achieves approximately 97.5% accuracy on biomedical corpora like CRAFT, underscoring the efficacy of lexicon-integrated approaches.
Post-2020 advancements extend these techniques to AI-driven drug discovery, where lemmatization preprocesses literature and patents to identify pharmacological candidates and repurpose existing drugs via text mining. In precision medicine pipelines, it enables the integration of unstructured biomedical data into machine learning models for target prediction, enhancing interoperability across ontologies like UMLS.

Challenges and Advances

Limitations

One significant limitation of lemmatization arises from challenges in resolving lexical ambiguity, particularly when part-of-speech (POS) tagging errors occur, leading to incorrect lemma assignments. For instance, words like "lead" can function as a verb (lemma: lead) or noun (lemma: lead), and misidentification of POS without sufficient contextual analysis can result in errors estimated at 10-20% in highly ambiguous cases across neural models. This issue is exacerbated in morphologically rich languages, where extensive inflectional ambiguity demands precise POS disambiguation, yet standard taggers achieve only 77-92% accuracy in lemmatization tasks due to unresolved homonymy.
Lemmatization also exhibits strong language dependency, performing poorly in low-resource languages owing to insufficient training data and morphological resources. In Swahili, for example, state-of-the-art syllable-based models achieve only about 81% accuracy in lemma discovery, while earlier approaches drop to 68%, highlighting the scarcity of annotated corpora that limits model generalization. Error analyses from benchmarks like Universal Dependencies (version 2.10, released in 2022) further reveal variance by language family, with Indo-European languages showing lower error rates (e.g., 2-4% for nouns and verbs in Italian) compared to Bantu languages like Swahili, where segmentation and lemmatization errors exceed 11% due to dialectal variations and loanword integration.
Computational costs represent another key constraint, especially for machine learning-based methods that rely on transformer architectures like BERT for context-aware lemmatization. Inference times for such models can be computationally intensive on standard CPU hardware, necessitating GPU resources for efficient processing and rendering them impractical for real-time applications on large-scale datasets. Dictionary-based approaches, while less resource-intensive per word, scale poorly for massive texts in the big data era, as exhaustive lookups become bottlenecks in distributed systems handling billions of tokens, often requiring custom optimizations like parallelization to maintain throughput.
Edge cases further undermine lemmatization reliability, including the handling of compound words, slang, and code-switching, where standard algorithms struggle to preserve semantic integrity. In German, compound nouns like "Eiscreme" (ice cream) often result in incomplete or erroneous lemmas during POS tagging and decomposition, leading to fragmentation rather than proper base forms. Similarly, slang terms or code-switched phrases (e.g., mixing English and Spanish in bilingual texts) evade dictionary coverage, while over-normalization risks conflate distinct entities, such as lemmatizing "Washington" as a common noun instead of a proper name when context is overlooked. These issues persist across methods, with morphological approaches offering only partial mitigation through rule extensions but failing in highly creative or non-standard usage.

Recent Developments

Post-2020 innovations in lemmatization have increasingly leveraged transformer architectures to enhance multilingual capabilities and handle morphologically complex languages. Fine-tuned models such as ByT5, a byte-level variant of the T5 transformer, have demonstrated superior performance in lemmatizing ancient cuneiform languages like Akkadian and Sumerian, achieving 80.55% accuracy on raw lemmas compared to 77.38% for the multilingual mT5 model, which supports over 100 languages through pre-training on diverse corpora. This advancement stems from ByT5's ability to bypass language-specific tokenization, effectively managing orthographic variations and diacritics without extensive preprocessing. Similarly, the GliLem hybrid system for Estonian integrates transformer-based named entity recognition with rule-based analyzers, attaining 97.7% lemmatization accuracy on benchmark datasets, surpassing traditional HMM-based methods by approximately 10%.
Hybrid approaches combining rule-based systems with large language models (LLMs) have emerged as a solution for zero-shot lemmatization in low-resource and historical settings. Adaptations of GPT-4 variants, such as GPT-4o, applied in few-shot scenarios for languages like ancient Greek, Armenian, Georgian, and Syriac, yield accuracies ranging from 65.6% to 94.2%, outperforming earlier RNN baselines in morphologically rich contexts by exploiting contextual understanding without annotated data. These methods enable lemma generation for under-resourced dialects by prompting LLMs to infer morphological rules, addressing gaps in traditional dictionary-based tools.
Efficiency gains in lemmatization have been realized through knowledge distillation techniques applied to transformers, reducing computational demands for real-time applications. Distilled variants like DistilBERT, which compresses the original BERT model to 40% of its size while retaining 97% of performance, facilitate faster inference in NLP pipelines, including lemmatization, with up to 60% latency reduction on resource-constrained devices. Recent distillation frameworks for transformers preserve up to 98% of accuracy in morphological tasks while minimizing memory footprint, making them suitable for integration in edge computing environments.
Emerging trends include unsupervised lemmatization via self-supervised learning on unannotated corpora, often powered by LLMs to generate lemmas without domain-specific resources. For instance, zero-resource approaches using generative LLMs achieve competitive results by simulating morphological transformations from web-scale text, enabling adaptation to new languages or dialects with minimal supervision. This self-training paradigm, combined with transformer embeddings, supports deployment in mobile NLP via lightweight models optimized for on-device processing.
A 2024 study on Estonian lemmatization showed transformer-enhanced systems outperforming rule-based methods by approximately 10% on benchmark datasets, particularly in contextual disambiguation. These shifts underscore the transition from rigid morphological rules to flexible, data-driven models.
Recent machine learning integrations in lemmatization also raise ethical concerns, notably bias in normalizing diverse dialects, where models trained on standard corpora underperform on non-dominant variants, perpetuating linguistic inequities. Efforts to mitigate this include diverse dataset curation and fairness audits to ensure equitable lemma representation across dialects.

References

On the Role of Morphological Information for Contextual ...

Lemmatization - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

What Are Stemming and Lemmatization? - IBM

Speech and Language Processing

Stemming and lemmatization - Stanford NLP Group

What is Lemmatization? Definition from TechTarget

LEMMA | definition in the Cambridge English Dictionary

What is a Lemma? - ThoughtCo

 An algorithm for suffix stripping - Computer Science

 A Study on Stemming vs Lemmatization - CEUR-WS

BioLemmatizer: a lemmatization tool for morphological processing of ...

Stemming and Lemmatization: A Comparison of Retrieval ...

WordNet

WordNet: a lexical database for English - ACM Digital Library

nltk.stem.WordNetLemmatizer

 Natural language processing: a historical review - ACL Anthology

Lemmatization with NLTK - GeeksforGeeks

 Finite-State Morphology: Xerox Tools and Techniques - source url

 Twenty-Five Years of Finite-State Morphology - Stanford University

 Two-Level Model for Morphological Analysis - IJCAI

 Development of a rule-based lemmatization algorithm through Finite ...

Hunspell: About

 Data-Driven Morphological Analysis for Uralic Languages

 DEMorphy, German Language Morphological Analyzer - arXiv

Building a large annotated corpus of English: the Penn Treebank

(PDF) The Penn Treebank: An overview - ResearchGate

A Simple Joint Model for Improved Contextual Neural Lemmatization

Cross-Lingual Lemmatization and Morphology Tagging with Two ...

Universal Dependencies v2.5 Benchmarks for spaCy - Explosion AI

Neural edit-tree lemmatization for spaCy - Explosion AI

UDPipe Models - FAL

Exploring Large Language Models for Classical Philology

Elasticsearch is awesome, but it won't fix your search problems | Tooso

Elasticsearch: The Basics and Inexact Matching I Instaclustr

 Resource-Size matters: Improving Neural Named Entity Recognition ...

 arXiv:2007.061

 LSA-based Language Model Adaptation for Highly Inflected ...

3 Processing Raw Text - NLTK

spaCy 101: Everything you need to know

spaCy Industrial-strength Natural Language Processing in Python

The Unified Medical Language System at 30 Years and How It Is ...

 Ontology-Based Clinical Information Extraction Using SNOMED CT

Text mining in medicine Knowledge Discovery and Intelligent ...

Text Mining of Electronic Health Records Can Accurately Identify ...

 Establishing a COVID-19 lemmatized word list for journalists and ...

Challenges in Clinical Natural Language Processing for Automated ...

Effective mapping of biomedical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus - NIH

Clinical concept recognition: Evaluation of existing systems on EHRs

Artificial intelligence in drug discovery and development - PMC

Artificial intelligence in early drug discovery enabling precision ...

 Neural Models for Lemmatization and POS-Tagging of Earlier and ...

 Improving the Computational Morphological Analysis of a Swahili ...

Universal Dependencies

 vs High-level Lemmatization for Historical Languages ... - CLiC-it 2025

 How to Train BERT with an Academic Budget - ACL Anthology

BERT inference cost/performance analysis CPU vs GPU

Reconstructing Complete Lemmas for Incomplete German ...

Challenges with Lemmatization - BytePlus

 Lemmatization of Cuneiform Languages Using the ByT5 Model

None

 lemmatization and POS-tagging with LLM annotators for historical

What are Small Language Models (SLMs) - GeeksforGeeks

 Efficient Transformer Knowledge Distillation: A Performance Review

 On Lemma Generation Without Domain- or Language-Specific ...

On Lemma Generation Without Domain- or Language-Specific ...

Addressing Equity in Natural Language Processing of English Dialects

Five sources of bias in natural language processing - PMC
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion