Linear probing Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Linear probing
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Linear probing is a collision resolution strategy employed in open-addressing hash tables, a data structure for storing key-value pairs where all elements reside directly in an array of fixed size. Upon encountering a collision during insertionwhen the computed hash index is already occupiedthe algorithm probes sequentially forward from that position by incrementing the index by 1 modulo the table size until an empty slot is found, at which point the new element is inserted. This method, also known as linear open addressing, contrasts with chaining by avoiding linked lists and instead redistributing collided elements within the primary array.
For searching and deletion, linear probing follows the same probe sequence as insertion to maintain consistency. In a search, starting from the initial hash index, the algorithm checks each subsequent slot until it finds the target key, an empty slot (indicating absence), or a full cycle of the table. Deletion requires marking slots as "deleted" rather than emptying them, to preserve probe paths for future operations; a full removal occurs only during rehashing when the table is resized, typically doubling in capacity and reinserting all elements into a new array. This approach ensures that searches and insertions remain efficient as long as the load factor (ratio of elements to table size) stays below approximately 0.75.
One key advantage of linear probing is its simplicity in implementation and favorable cache locality, as probes access consecutive memory locations, potentially outperforming chained hashing in modern hardware. However, it suffers from primary clustering, where consecutive occupied slots form dense groups, lengthening probe sequences for nearby keys and degrading performance as the table fills; this can lead to up to O(n worst-case time for operations in highly loaded tables. To mitigate clustering, variants like quadratic probing or double hashing adjust the probe step size, though linear probing remains widely used in applications prioritizing speed over load tolerance.
Performance analysis under the uniform hashing assumption reveals that the average number of probes for a successful search in a linear probing hash table is 12(1+11)\frac{1}{2} \left(1 + \frac{1}{1 - \alpha}\right)21(1+11), while unsuccessful searches average 12(1+1(1)2)\frac{1}{2} \left(1 + \frac{1}{(1 - \alpha)^2}\right)21(1+(1)21), highlighting the quadratic sensitivity to load factor. These formulas, derived from probabilistic models, underscore the importance of resizing before exceeds 0.5 for balanced efficiency.

Background

Hash tables and collision resolution

A hash table is a data structure that stores key-value pairs in an array of fixed size, using a hash function to compute an index for each key, thereby enabling average-case constant-time O(1) performance for insertions, deletions, and lookups. The hash function transforms a key into a non-negative integer within the range of array indices, ideally distributing keys uniformly to minimize overlaps.
Collisions occur when two or more distinct keys map to the same array index via the hash function, a situation inevitable given the finite table size relative to the potentially vast key space. For example, in a table of size 10, the keys "David" and "Eva" might both hash to index 4, requiring a resolution strategy to maintain data integrity and accessibility.
To address collisions, hash tables employ resolution techniques such as separate chaining or open addressing. In separate chaining, each array slot holds a linked list, with colliding keys appended to the list at the hashed index; this approach simplifies implementation and supports high occupancy without severe degradation, though it incurs extra space for list pointers and may involve traversal costs. Conversely, open addressing resolves collisions by searching for an unoccupied slot within the array itself, promoting space efficiency by eliminating pointer overhead, but risking longer probe sequences as the table fills, which can amplify access times.
The load factor , defined as the number of keys n divided by the table size m ( = n/m), quantifies table utilization and directly influences collision frequency; values approaching 1 heighten resolution demands, potentially eroding the O(1) performance guarantee. Linear probing serves as one technique within the open addressing paradigm.

Open addressing overview

Open addressing, also known as closed hashing, is a collision resolution technique in hash tables where all elements are stored directly within the table's array, without using external lists or chains. When a collision occursmeaning the computed hash index for a key is already occupiedthe method resolves it by systematically probing subsequent slots in the array to find an empty one, guided by a secondary probe function $ h(k, i) $, where $ k $ is the key and $ i $ is the probe count starting from 0. This approach was first formalized as a practical method for random-access storage systems.
Unlike separate chaining, which appends collided keys to linked lists at each array slot and incurs overhead from pointer storage, open addressing maintains a single contiguous array, reducing memory usage by avoiding pointers and enabling more compact data representation. However, this efficiency comes at the cost of potentially longer probe sequences as the load factorthe ratio of stored elements to array sizeincreases, since unsuccessful searches must traverse occupied slots until an empty one or the key is found.
Several variants of open addressing differ in how the probe sequence is generated to mitigate clustering, where consecutive probes tend to examine nearby slots. Linear probing uses a constant step size of 1, advancing sequentially from the initial hash position. Quadratic probing employs a step size of $ i^2 $, producing a nonlinear sequence that spreads probes more evenly. Double hashing utilizes a secondary hash function to determine the step size, typically $ h_2(k) $, yielding the probe offset as $ i \times h_2(k) \mod m $, where $ m $ is the table size, for greater permutation quality. The general insertion procedure in open addressing follows this skeleton:
function insert(key k):
 i 0
 repeat:
 slot (h(k) + (/page/P.R.O.B.E.)(k, i)) mod m
 if table is empty or is deleted:
 table k
 return
 i i + 1
 until i == m // table full, handle resize or failure
Here, $ h_1 $ is the primary hash, and probe is the variant-specific function (e.g., probe(k, i) = i for linear). Search and verification follow a similar loop, terminating on match, empty slot, or exhaustion.
Open addressing offers advantages in modern systems, particularly cache efficiency, as probe sequences often access contiguous memory locations, improving locality and reducing cache misses compared to scattered chain traversals. Nonetheless, it presents challenges in deletion, where simply removing an element could disrupt probe paths for other keys, necessitating markers like tombstones to preserve sequence integrity during searches. Additionally, the method is prone to clustering, where insertions form dense groups of occupied slots, exacerbating probe lengths and limiting effective load factors to around 0.70.8 for practicality.

Core operations

Search procedure

In linear probing, the search procedure begins by computing the initial hash position $ h(k) = \hash(k) \mod m $, where $ k $ is the key, $ \hash $ is the hash function, and $ m $ is the table size. The algorithm then probes sequentially forward from this position using the probe sequence $ h(k, i) = (h(k) + i) \mod m $ for $ i = 0, 1, 2, \dots $, examining each slot until it either locates the key $ k $, encounters an empty slot (indicating the key is absent), or completes a full cycle through the table (indicating the table is full and the key is not present).
The following pseudocode illustrates the search algorithm, incorporating the loop termination conditions:
Algorithm Search(table T, key k, size m)
 i 0
 while true do
 j (hash(k) + i) mod m
 if T is empty then
 return not found // Key absent
 if T.key = k then
 return found // Key located at j
 i i + 1
 if i = m then
 return not found // Table full, key absent
 end while
This procedure ensures that all potential positions in the probe sequence are checked without prematurely stopping unless justified by an empty slot or full cycle.
Consider a hash table of size 4 with initial empty slots, after insertions of "apple" (hash value 1) and "banana" (hash value 3), resulting in slots: . Searching for "apple" starts at index 1, finds the key immediately, and returns success after one probe. In contrast, searching for "cherry" (hash value 0) probes index 0 (empty), terminates immediately, and returns not found.
To support deletions without disrupting searches, deleted slots are marked as occupied (e.g., with a special "deleted" indicator) rather than empty, requiring the search to continue probing past them until an empty slot or the key is found.

Insertion process

In linear probing, the insertion process begins by computing the initial hash value $ h'(k) $ for the key $ k $, where the hash table $ T $ has size $ m $. The algorithm then follows the probe sequence $ h(k, i) = (h'(k) + i) \mod m $ for $ i = 0, 1, \dots $, sequentially checking each slot starting from $ h'(k) $. If the key $ k $ is found at any slot, the insertion terminates without adding a duplicate. Otherwise, the key is placed in the first empty slot encountered (typically denoted as NIL). If the probing completes a full cycle through all $ m $ slots without finding an empty one, the table is considered full, and an overflow error is raised.
The following pseudocode outlines the insertion procedure, adapted from standard open-addressing implementations:
HASH-INSERT(T, k)
1 i 0
2 repeat
3 j (h'(k) + i) mod m
4 if T is empty
5 T k
6 return j
7 else if T = k
8 return j // key already present
9 i i + 1
10 until i = m
11 error "(/page/Hash_table) overflow"
This procedure ensures that insertions respect the probe sequences used for searches, preventing overwrites of existing keys.
To maintain performance, practical implementations monitor the load factor $ \alpha = n/m $ (where $ n $ is the number of elements) and suggest resizing the tabletypically by doubling $ m $ and rehashing all elementswhen $ \alpha $ exceeds a threshold like 0.7, as higher loads degrade probe lengths significantly in linear probing.
For example, consider a hash table of size $ m = 5 $ with an initial hash function where $ h'(\text{"dog"}) = 2 $, and slots 2 and 3 already occupied by other keys. The probe sequence starts at slot 2 (occupied), moves to slot 3 (occupied), then slot 4 (empty), inserting "dog" there.
The insertion process relies on the same probing mechanism as search to detect duplicates and locate empty slots, ensuring consistency across operations without overwriting valid entries.

Deletion handling

Deletion in linear probing hash tables presents a challenge because simply setting a slot to empty after removing a key can disrupt the probe sequences of other keys that would have continued searching through that position, potentially causing those keys to become unfindable during subsequent searches. To address this, the standard approach uses special markers known as tombstones or "deleted" flags placed in the slots of removed keys. These markers indicate that the slot is available for future insertions but is treated as occupied during searches to preserve the integrity of probe sequences.
The deletion algorithm begins by performing the standard linear probing search to locate the key. If the key is found, the slot's value is replaced with the deleted marker rather than being set to empty. Searches and insertions are modified accordingly: during a search, if a tombstone is encountered, the probing continues as if the slot were occupied by a non-matching key; for insertion, tombstones are considered available slots, allowing new keys to be placed there and potentially reusing the space without breaking existing chains. The following pseudocode illustrates the deletion process:
function DELETE(key):
 i 0
 start HASH(key) mod m
 while true do
 j (start + i) mod m
 if table is empty:
 return // key not found
 if table = key:
 table deleted // place tombstone
 return
 i i + 1
 if i = m:
 return // table full, key not found
 end while
This ensures that probe sequences remain continuous for other elements.
However, repeated deletions lead to an accumulation of tombstones, which effectively increase the load factor by occupying slots without holding useful data, thereby lengthening average probe sequences and degrading overall performance over time. To mitigate this, implementations often monitor the number of tombstones and trigger periodic rehashing into a larger table or compaction to remove them when they reach a threshold, such as half the table size.
Consider an example with a hash table using linear probing and a simple hash function where both "apple" and "banana" hash to position 2. "Apple" is inserted first at 2. "Banana" collides at 2, probes to 3 (empty), and is inserted there (position 1 and 4+ empty). Deleting "apple" at position 2 by setting it to a tombstone allows a search for "banana" to start at 2 (tombstone, continue probing), reach 3, and find it correctly, whereas setting position 2 to empty would stop the search prematurely. Subsequent insertion of a new key hashing to 2 could then reuse the tombstone slot.

Performance analysis

Load factor impact

The load factor in linear probing is defined as the ratio of the number of stored elements n to the table size m, or = n/m.
Linear probing achieves efficient performance when remains below 0.70.8, but degrades sharply as nears 1.0 due to substantially longer probe sequences required for operations.
To sustain efficiency, implementations typically resize the table by doubling its size and rehashing all elements when exceeds a threshold such as 0.7, which keeps the load factor in a range where probe lengths stay manageable.
Empirical analysis under uniform hashing reveals that at = 0.5, the expected probes for a successful search average about 1.5, while unsuccessful searches or insertions require around 2.5; at = 0.9, these rise to approximately 5.5 and over 50 probes, respectively, highlighting the method's vulnerability at high loads.
Load Factor Successful Search (Probes)Unsuccessful Search (Probes)
0.251.21.4
0.501.52.5
0.672.05.0
0.752.58.5
0.905.550.5
Compared to chaining, linear probing in open addressing is more sensitive to elevated since the table fills to capacity at = 1, but offers speed advantages at low by eliminating pointer traversals in linked lists.

Probe sequence length

In linear probing, the expected number of probes for an unsuccessful search is given by 12(1+1(1)2)\frac{1}{2} \left(1 + \frac{1}{(1 - \alpha)^2}\right)21(1+(1)21), where \alpha denotes the load factor, representing the ratio of occupied slots to total table size. This formula arises from probabilistic analysis assuming uniform hashing, where the positions of empty slots follow a geometric distribution with success probability 11 - \alpha1. Specifically, the probability that a probe sequence requires exactly kkk probes is (1)k1(1 - \alpha) \alpha^{k-1}(1)k1 under the approximation of independent probes, leading to the expected value via summation: k=1k(1)k1=11\sum_{k=1}^{\infty} k (1 - \alpha) \alpha^{k-1} = \frac{1}{1 - \alpha}k=1k(1)k1=11; however, the more precise derivation in linear probing accounts for the sequential nature by averaging over the squared term to yield the quadratic form.
For a successful search, the expected probe length simplifies to 12(1+11)\frac{1}{2} \left(1 + \frac{1}{1 - \alpha}\right)21(1+11), derived similarly by considering the average position of inserted keys relative to their hash locations, again rooted in the geometric distribution of empty slots encountered during insertions. This reflects the fact that successful searches tend to probe fewer locations on average, as they terminate upon finding the key rather than an empty slot.
In the worst case, probe sequences can require up to O(m)O(m)O(m) probes, where mmm is the table size, occurring when the table is nearly full or when long clusters force traversal of most slots.
The distribution of probe lengths approximates an exponential (or discrete geometric) form at moderate load factors \alpha.
Theoretical predictions from these equations align closely with empirical results from simulations for load factors up to =0.8\alpha = 0.8=0.8, beyond which clustering effects begin to deviate outcomes from the ideal model.

Clustering issues

Primary clustering explanation

Primary clustering is a phenomenon observed in linear probing hash tables, where keys that hash to nearby indices tend to form long, contiguous runs of occupied slots, thereby extending the probe sequences for subsequent insertions and searches in that region of the table. This occurs because the probe sequence in linear probing advances by a fixed step size of 1, causing collided keys to sequentially fill adjacent slots and create dense clusters around the initial hash locations.
The root cause stems from this uniform linear progression: when multiple keys hash to slots in close proximitysay, indices 5, 6, or 7they occupy a continuous block starting from the earliest available slot in that range, forcing later probes to traverse the entire cluster before finding an empty slot or the target key. For instance, consider a hash table of size 13 with initial hashes placing keys at positions 5 (occupies 5), then 6 (occupies 6), and another at 5 (collides and occupies 7); a subsequent key hashing to 7 now must probe through 7 (occupied), 8, and beyond, extending the effective run to slots 57 and growing the cluster further with each similar collision.
To illustrate cluster growth, envision a linear array representing the hash table slots (0 to 12), initially all empty (denoted as ). After inserting a key hashing to slot 3 (occupies 3: X ), a second key hashing to 4 (occupies 4: X X ), and a third hashing to 3 (probes to 5: X X X ), a cluster forms at positions 35. A fourth key hashing to 2 (if empty, occupies 2, but if another collision arises nearby, it joins or extends the run: X X X X ). Over repeated insertions near this region, the cluster expands contiguously, as shown by the progressive filling of sequential slots.
This primary clustering in linear probing differs from secondary clustering seen in other open-addressing schemes like quadratic or double hashing, where the issue arises specifically when multiple keys share the exact same initial hash value and thus follow identical probe sequences, rather than from the adjacency of different hash values.

Effects on performance

Primary clustering degrades the performance of linear probing by creating long runs of occupied slots, which significantly increase the length of probe sequences in affected regions. In the worst case, insertions or searches starting near a cluster can require traversing the entire run, leading to probe counts that approximate O(1/(1 - \alpha)^2) for unsuccessful operations at load factor \alpha, far exceeding the expected O(1) amortized time under uniform distribution assumptions. This results in practical average probe lengths that are 2-3 times longer than those in clustering-resistant methods like double hashing at moderate load factors, with variance in access times rising due to some operations resolving quickly while others suffer extended traversals through clusters.
The sequential nature of linear probing probes benefits cache locality by accessing contiguous memory locations, often yielding fewer cache misses than scattered probing schemes. However, in clustered regions, long probe sequences can span multiple cache lines, incurring misses at cluster boundaries and amplifying the overall slowdown, particularly for larger table sizes where spatial locality advantages diminish.
Empirical analyses confirm these impacts, showing linear probing's average unsuccessful probe length rising sharply with clustering. For instance, at \alpha = 0.7, linear probing requires approximately 6 probes on average for unsuccessful searches, compared to about 3.3 for double hashing, representing a roughly 80% slowdown in probe count due to clustering effects. At higher loads like \alpha = 0.9, this gap widens to 5 times more probes (50.5 vs. 10). The following table summarizes average unsuccessful probe lengths from theoretical models and simulations, highlighting the degradation:
Load Factor (\alpha)Linear Probing (Clustered)Double Hashing (Uniform)Slowdown Factor
0.52.52.01.25x
0.76.13.31.85x
0.950.510.05.05x
These results underscore how clustering transforms linear probing's theoretical efficiency into practical bottlenecks at loads above 0.5.
Deletions compound these issues through the use of tombstones (marked deleted slots), which do not create gaps but force subsequent probes to continue past them, effectively extending cluster lengths and increasing the number of steps needed to find empty slots or confirm absences. This raises the effective load factor and probe counts, with analyses showing insertions can take \Theta(x^2) time at load factor 1 - 1/x without mitigation, though tombstones introduce some anti-clustering in mixed workloads. In practice, frequent deletions can inflate average search times beyond insertion-only scenarios at \alpha = 0.7, necessitating periodic rehashing to restore performance.

Hash function selection

Ideal hash function properties

For optimal performance in linear probing, a hash function must generate values that are uniformly distributed across the table indices , where m denotes the table size, thereby reducing the probability of initial collisions among inserted keys. This property aligns with the simple uniform hashing assumption, under which each key hashes independently and with equal probability to any slot, promoting even spread and minimizing early clustering tendencies.
Furthermore, the hash function should demonstrate the avalanche effect, such that even a minor alteration in the input keysuch as flipping a single bitproduces a markedly different hash value, on average changing roughly half the output bits to disrupt potential patterns in key similarities. This diffusion quality ensures that related keys do not predictably map to nearby slots, which is particularly beneficial in linear probing where sequential searches amplify localized biases.
To avoid inherent correlations between hash outputs and the linear probe increments (which could exacerbate natural clustering in modular arithmetic), the function requires a degree of statistical independence from the probing mechanism; research establishes that at least 5-wise independent hashing suffices to achieve expected constant-time operations by bounding probe sequence lengths effectively.
Such well-designed hash functions interact favorably with the load factor (the ratio of occupied slots to table size), as their uniformity and independence postpone the buildup of probe chains, sustaining efficient insertions and searches at higher valuestypically up to around 0.5 to 0.7before degradation sets in.
In implementation, the uniformity of candidate hash functions is empirically assessed via the chi-squared goodness-of-fit test, which compares the observed frequency of hash values across bins against the expected uniform distribution, with low p-values indicating non-random deviations that could impair probing efficiency.

Practical choices and examples

For integer keys, a simple and common hash function in linear probing tables is the modulo operation, defined as $ h(k) = k \mod m $, where $ k $ is the key and $ m $ is the table size; this maps keys uniformly to slots when $ m $ is chosen appropriately. For example, in a table of size 10, inserting keys 5, 15, and 25 would all hash to slot 5, requiring linear probing to resolve collisions by checking subsequent slots.
For string keys, polynomial rolling hashes are widely used to treat the string as a base-$ b $ number in base-$ m $ arithmetic, computed as $ h(s) = \left( \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} s \cdot b^{n-1-i} \right) \mod m $, where $ s $ is the character code at position $ i $, $ n $ is the string length, and $ b $ is typically 31 or 37 to balance computation speed and distribution quality. This approach avoids overflow issues by computing incrementally: initialize hash to 0, then for each character $ c $, update as $ \text{hash} = (\text{hash} \cdot b + c) \mod m $.
int hash = 0;
for (int i = 0; i < s.(/page/Length)(); i++) {
 hash = (hash * 31 + s.charAt(i)) % m;
}
In implementations like those in educational algorithms libraries, Java's built-in String.hashCode() methodwhich uses a polynomial rolling hash with base 31is directly adapted for linear probing by taking the absolute value and modulo $ m $, ensuring compatibility with the table size while leveraging the language's standard for string hashing. For instance, the LinearProbingHashST class computes the initial probe as hash = (key.hashCode() & 0x7fffffff) % m, then applies linear offsets.
Practical trade-offs favor simple modulo or polynomial hashes for their computational speed in general-purpose linear probing tables, as they require only basic arithmetic operations and achieve good uniformity without excessive overhead. In contrast, non-cryptographic hashes like MurmurHash offer superior avalanche properties for better distribution against patterned inputs, making them suitable for high-performance scenarios, but they involve more complex bit manipulations that increase computation time, rendering them overkill for typical non-security-sensitive uses. Cryptographic hashes, such as SHA-256, provide strong collision resistance but are significantly slower due to their security-focused design, and are rarely used in linear probing unless data integrity is paramount.
During rehashing upon table resize, selecting a new size $ m $ that is prime is essential to preserve hash uniformity, as primes minimize systematic biases in the modulo distribution for common key patterns, reducing clustering in linear probing. For example, resizing from 100 to the next prime (e.g., 101) ensures that previously clustered probes spread more evenly under the same hash function.

Historical development

Origins and key contributors

Linear probing emerged in the early 1950s as a collision resolution technique within open addressing schemes for hash tables, developed by a team of IBM researchers including Gene Amdahl, Elaine M. Boehme (later McGraw), Nathaniel Rochester, and Arthur Samuel. Their work was part of an assembler program for the IBM 701, one of the first commercial scientific computers, where efficient symbol table management required handling key collisions without external storage overflow. This innovation allowed for simple, memory-resident lookups by sequentially probing adjacent slots, addressing the limitations of early hashing methods that relied on chaining or rehashing.
The method gained formal recognition through W. Wesley Peterson's seminal 1957 paper, "Addressing for Random-Access Storage," published in the IBM Journal of Research and Development. In this work, Peterson defined open addressing and provided the first detailed analysis of linear probing's performance for random-access file systems, estimating access times and highlighting its advantages in speed and flexibility over traditional sequential or sorted indexing. Independently, Soviet computer scientist Andrey P. Ershov described a similar linear open addressing approach in 1958 (originally presented in 1957), based on empirical tests for programming language implementations.
Linear probing arose amid the transition from punched-card batch processing to direct-access storage devices in the 1950s, where punched-card systems demanded faster, non-sequential data retrieval for indexing large files without exhaustive sorting. Unlike earlier methods that processed records in fixed order, linear probing enabled approximate random access, reducing I/O operations in emerging drum and disk-based systems.
By the early 1960s, the technique saw adoption in IBM's file organization and database prototypes, incorporating hashing principles for efficient record retrieval in commercial data processing applications.

Evolution and related methods

In the 1970s, refinements to linear probing addressed key operational challenges, particularly the handling of deletions. Donald Knuth formalized the use of tombstonesspecial markers for deleted entriesto preserve the integrity of probe sequences during searches and insertions, preventing the disruption of subsequent probes that could occur if slots were simply emptied. This approach ensured that deletions did not break the chain of occupied slots, maintaining the expected performance bounds analyzed in Knuth's work.
By the 1980s, linear probing gained practical adoption in programming languages and standard libraries. The hsearch function, part of the POSIX standard and implemented in systems like GNU C Library, utilized linear probing for open-addressing hash tables, providing a simple mechanism for managing key-value pairs in resource-constrained environments. This integration highlighted linear probing's appeal for straightforward implementations without dynamic memory allocation.
Linear probing's primary clustering issues, where consecutive probes form long runs of occupied slots, directly inspired related collision resolution methods. Double hashing, which employs a secondary hash function to compute variable probe steps, emerged as an early variant to mitigate this clustering by distributing probes more uniformly across the table. As a modern descendant, cuckoo hashing (introduced in 2001) builds on probing concepts by allowing key relocations between multiple hash locations, achieving constant-time worst-case lookups while avoiding the linear scan's degradation.
Post-2000 optimizations further evolved linear probing for contemporary hardware. Hopscotch hashing, proposed in 2008, enhances locality by restricting entries to a fixed "neighborhood" around their ideal hash position, reducing cache misses and supporting higher load factors than standard linear probing without extensive rehashing. These advancements addressed lingering inefficiencies in cache-sensitive applications.
Despite these developments, linear probing has declined in favor of separate chaining for high-load scenarios, where clustering causes probe lengths to grow quadratically, leading to performance bottlenecks beyond load factors of 0.7. It persists in modern uses like CPython's dictionary implementation (as of Python 3.12), which employs open addressing with probing variants valued for their cache efficiency and simplicity, and in embedded systems where pointer-free structures minimize memory overhead.

References

Linear probing Clayton Cafiero - University of Vermont

15.6. Collision Resolution - OpenDSA

 Collision Resolution

 Lecture 4: Hashing, Chaining, and Probing Analysis - Rice University

 CMSC 420: Lecture 16 Hashing - UMD Computer Science

 Lecture 10: Hash Collision Resolutions - Washington

 CSE 100: HASHING

 Hash Tables - GMU CS Department

 Hash Tables - Algorithms, 4th Edition

 Hash Table Analysis - Rose-Hulman

 Chapter 5. Hash Tables

 Lecture 16 - UCSD CSE

9.4. Separate Chaining Data Structures and Algorithms

Addressing for Random-Access Storage | Semantic Scholar

The art of computer programming: sorting and searching (volume 3 ...

Universal Classes of Hash Functions - Semantic Scholar

 How Caching Affects Hashing - CS@Cornell

 On Deletions in Open Addressing Hashing - UPCommons

 Chapter 19 Hashing - CMU School of Computer Science

 Hash Tables

Open Addressing: Handling collision in hashing - Emory CS

 CS 3137 Class Notes 1 What is Hashing?

None

19.5 Resizing & Hash Table Performance | CS61B Textbook

 Lecture 24 Hash Tables - CMU School of Computer Science

None

 Contents 1 Open-address hash tables - People | MIT CSAIL

 Tabulation Based 5-Universal Hashing and Linear Probing

 CSE 332 - Washington

Hashing Review - andrew.cmu.ed

 CMSC 420: Lecture 11 Hashing - Handling Collisions

Linear Probing Revisited: Tombstones Mark the Death of Primary ...

 Algorithms - cs.Princeton

CS202 Lecture notes -- Hashing - UTK-EECS

 Linear Probing with Constant Independence - arXiv

 CS 310: Hashing Basics and Hash Functions - GMU CS Department

 CMSC 341 Lecture 17 Hashing, Parts 1 & 2 - UMBC

LinearProbingHashST.java - Algorithms, 4th Edition

 Hashing

 Sorting & Searching Chapter 6, Searching: Hashing: History

Addressing for random-access storage - ACM Digital Library

(PDF) The Legendary IBM 1401 Data Processing System

The Art of Computer Programming (TAOCP)

The analysis of double hashing(Extended Abstract)

 Cuckoo Hashing

 Hopscotch Hashing - People | MIT CSAIL

 Lecture 26 Hash Tables - CMU School of Computer Science

Internals of sets and dicts | Fluent Python, the lizard book
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion