Manual memory management Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Manual memory management
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Manual memory management is a programming technique in which developers explicitly allocate and deallocate memory space for data structures and objects during the execution of a program, typically using language-specific primitives such as malloc and free in C. This approach places full responsibility on the programmer to request memory from the heap when needed and to release it once it is no longer required, without relying on runtime systems for automatic reclamation. It contrasts sharply with automatic memory management methods like garbage collection, where the runtime environment handles deallocation implicitly.
Historically, manual memory management has been prevalent in low-level languages since the early days of computing, offering programmers precise control over resource usage in resource-constrained environments. Languages such as C and C++ exemplify this paradigm, enabling efficient memory handling through mechanisms like free listsdata structures that track available memory blocks, often organized by fixed sizes such as powers of twoto minimize allocation overhead. A semi-automated variant, reference counting, involves manually incrementing and decrementing counters for object references to determine when memory can be freed, though it still requires explicit programmer intervention.
While manual management provides advantages like fine-grained optimization and reduced runtime overhead in performance-critical applications, it demands meticulous tracking of memory ownership to avoid common pitfalls. Key challenges include memory leaks, where allocated memory is never freed, leading to gradual exhaustion of available resources; dangling pointers, resulting from premature deallocation that leaves references to invalid memory; and fragmentation, where free memory becomes scattered in non-contiguous blocks, impeding further allocations despite sufficient total space. These errors can cause program crashes, undefined behavior, or security vulnerabilities, making manual approaches error-prone and burdensome for developers. Over time, the rise of automatic alternatives has diminished its dominance, though it remains essential in systems programming and embedded systems where predictability and efficiency are paramount.

Fundamentals

Definition and Core Concepts

Manual memory management refers to a programming paradigm in which the developer explicitly allocates and deallocates memory from the heap using system calls or library functions, in contrast to automatic management where a runtime system handles these tasks. This approach provides fine-grained control over memory usage, allowing programmers to request space for data structures whose sizes are determined at runtime rather than compile time.
At its core, manual memory management distinguishes between stack and heap memory regions. Stack memory is automatically allocated and deallocated for local variables and function calls, following a last-in-first-out (LIFO) discipline managed by the compiler and runtime environment. In contrast, heap memory supports dynamic allocation for flexible data structures such as variable-length arrays or objects, where the program's needs exceed what can be predicted at compile time. This is essential in languages like C and C++, which lack built-in garbage collection and rely on explicit programmer intervention to prevent resource exhaustion.
The archetypal mechanisms in C are the malloc and free functions from the standard library. The malloc function allocates a block of memory of the specified size in bytes and returns a pointer to the beginning of that block, or NULL if the allocation fails due to insufficient memory. Its signature is void *malloc(size_t size);. Complementarily, free deallocates the memory previously allocated by malloc, taking the pointer to the block as its argument: void free(void *ptr);, with NULL as a safe no-op input. These functions enable runtime adaptability but require the programmer to track allocations meticulously.
Manual management becomes necessary when dealing with data structures whose dimensions or existence are unknown until program execution, such as user-input arrays or dynamically growing lists, which cannot rely solely on stack allocation limited by scope and fixed sizes. Unlike automatic memory management in higher-level languages, which abstracts these details via garbage collectors, manual approaches demand explicit pairing of allocation and deallocation to maintain program efficiency and correctness.

Historical Development

Manual memory management traces its roots to the 1950s and 1960s, when programming was dominated by assembly languages and early high-level languages such as Fortran and Algol. In assembly programming, developers directly manipulated memory through registers and explicit address calculations, with no automated support for allocation or deallocation. Fortran, developed by IBM between 1954 and 1956, introduced some abstraction for scientific computing but required programmers to manage memory manually, often using fixed-size arrays or COMMON blocks for data sharing across subroutines, as dynamic allocation was not standardized. Similarly, Algol 58, released in 1958 as the first block-structured language, relied on stack-based allocation for local variables within blocks but left heap management to explicit programmer control in implementations, emphasizing portability over automation.
A pivotal contrast emerged in 1959 with John McCarthy's invention of garbage collection for Lisp, which automated memory reclamation to simplify the manual management that Lisp's list-based structures otherwise demanded; this innovation, detailed in McCarthy's foundational work, highlighted the trade-offs of automatic versus manual approaches, spurring the latter's adoption in performance-critical systems where predictable timing outweighed ease of use. Manual methods gained standardization in the early 1970s through the introduction of malloc and free functions in Unix, originating in the 1973 Fourth Edition kernel code for dynamic allocation of memory blocks and evolving into user-space library routines by the late 1970s. These functions became central to the C language, developed by Dennis Ritchie at Bell Labs between 1972 and 1973 specifically for systems programming on Unix, where explicit control over heap allocation via pointers enabled efficient, low-level resource handling without runtime overhead.
The evolution continued with C++ in 1985, where Bjarne Stroustrup extended C by introducing the new and delete operators to support object-oriented dynamic allocation, invoking constructors and destructors while preserving manual deallocation for fine-grained control. Manual memory management persisted in embedded and real-time systems due to its determinism, avoiding the non-deterministic pauses of garbage collection, and remains essential in these domains for ensuring timely responses. In the 1990s, debates intensified around manual versus automatic management in object-oriented languages, with empirical studies showing automatic methods could match or exceed manual performance in some cases, yet manual approaches dominated industrial use until the mid-1990s for their predictability and efficiency in resource-constrained environments. Into the 2020s, manual management endures in operating system kernels like Linux, written primarily in C for direct hardware control, and in game engines using C++ for optimizing memory in high-performance rendering pipelines.

Techniques and Methods

Memory Allocation Approaches

Manual memory management relies on explicit allocation mechanisms to request memory from the operating system or a pre-managed pool, typically through functions like malloc in C or new in C++. Standard implementations, such as those in the GNU C Library (glibc), grow the heap using system calls like sbrk to incrementally extend the program's data segment or mmap to map anonymous memory pages for larger or isolated allocations, allowing flexible heap expansion without fixed limits. These approaches support both fixed-size blocks, where memory is divided into uniform chunks suitable for homogeneous objects, and variable-size blocks, which accommodate diverse request sizes but introduce complexity in tracking and reuse.
Free list management is a core technique for variable-size allocations, maintaining a linked list of available blocks sorted by address or size. Common strategies include first-fit, which scans the list from the beginning and selects the initial block large enough for the request to minimize search time; best-fit, which searches the entire list to find the smallest suitable block, aiming to preserve larger free spaces for future large allocations; and worst-fit, which chooses the largest available block to leave smaller remnants that may better suit subsequent small requests. Empirical studies show first-fit often performs comparably to best-fit in speed and utilization while being simpler to implement, though best-fit can reduce long-term fragmentation in workloads with varied sizes.
The buddy system addresses fragmentation in power-of-two sized allocations by organizing memory into blocks that are repeatedly split into halves (buddies) when a smaller size is needed, and merged back upon release if adjacent buddies are free. This method ensures exact fits for power-of-two requests and limits external fragmentation by facilitating coalescing, though it may waste space for non-power-of-two sizes due to rounding up. It is particularly effective in kernel environments where allocation sizes align with hardware page boundaries, achieving low overhead in merge operations.
Advanced methods like memory pools pre-allocate a contiguous block for fixed-size objects, enabling constant-time allocation by maintaining an array or list of available slots, which is common in performance-critical applications such as game engines for entities like particles or projectiles. Slab allocators extend this by caching partially used slabsfixed-size pages divided into object slotsfor specific types, recycling initialized objects to avoid repeated setup costs; the Linux kernel's SLUB variant, for instance, uses per-CPU caches to minimize contention in multiprocessor systems.
Fragmentation undermines allocation efficiency, with internal fragmentation arising from unused space within allocated blocks (e.g., when a 10-byte request receives a 16-byte block, wasting 6 bytes) and external fragmentation from scattered free holes too small for new requests despite sufficient total free memory. A common metric for assessing external fragmentation is the ratio of the largest contiguous free block size to the total free memory; low ratios indicate significant waste. Buddy and slab systems mitigate this by design, often maintaining high ratios in steady-state workloads.

Memory Deallocation Strategies

In manual memory management, basic deallocation involves explicit calls to release memory blocks previously allocated from the heap, marking them as available for reuse by the runtime or operating system. In C, the free function deallocates the space pointed to by a pointer returned from malloc, calloc, realloc, or aligned_alloc, with no action taken if the pointer is null. This process returns the memory to the heap but does not zero the contents, and accessing the pointer after deallocation results in undefined behavior. To prevent double-free errors, where the same block is deallocated multiple times leading to memory corruption, programmers often set the pointer to null immediately after calling free, as repeated deallocation on the same non-null pointer invokes undefined behavior. Some debugging implementations use sentinels or magic numbers, such as filling freed memory with patterns like 0xdeadbeef, to detect invalid accesses or double frees at runtime.
In C++, the delete operator handles deallocation for objects allocated with new, first invoking the object's destructor before releasing the memory via operator delete. For arrays allocated with new, delete is used, which calls destructors for each element. Mismatching single and array forms or deallocating invalid pointers results in undefined behavior, emphasizing the need to pair allocation and deallocation precisely. Ownership transfer in manual contexts occurs when a pointer is passed to a function that assumes responsibility for deallocation, requiring the caller to relinquish control without deleting it themselves to avoid double-free issues.
For complex data structures like linked lists and trees, deallocation requires manual traversal to release each node individually, as the runtime does not automatically handle interconnected blocks. In C, deallocating a singly linked list involves iterating from the head: a temporary pointer advances to the next node while freeing the current one, ensuring no dangling references remain. For binary trees in C++, a recursive approach deletes the left subtree, then the right, before deleting the root node, propagating the process to all descendants. This post-order traversal prevents premature deallocation of referenced nodes.
Circular references, where structures point cyclically to each other, pose challenges without garbage collection, as reference counts (if used manually) would prevent deallocation. Programmers must explicitly break cycles by setting one or more pointers to null before deallocating, ensuring all objects become unreachable and can be freed without leaks or errors.
Batch deallocation strategies, such as arena allocators, improve efficiency by allocating multiple objects from a single contiguous region and freeing the entire arena in one operation, avoiding per-object overhead. In systems like Google's Protocol Buffers for C++, arenas enable near-instant deallocation by discarding the block upon transaction commit or rollback, with optional destructor invocation for owned objects. This approach is particularly useful in transactional or short-lived scopes, where individual deallocations would be costly.
Language-specific mechanisms reflect these principles: in Pascal, the dispose procedure releases memory allocated by new for typed pointers or invokes a destructor for objects before freeing, returning the block to the heap. In C++, explicit delete enforces destructor calls, contrasting C's raw free which handles plain blocks without cleanup.

Correctness and Common Pitfalls

Types of Memory Errors

In manual memory management, particularly in languages like C and C++ where developers explicitly allocate and deallocate memory using functions such as malloc and free, several types of errors can arise due to improper handling, leading to undefined behavior, resource exhaustion, or security vulnerabilities.
Memory leaks occur when allocated memory is not freed after its use, causing it to remain inaccessible and gradually exhausting available resources. For instance, in a loop that repeatedly calls malloc to allocate memory for processing but forgets to pair each allocation with a corresponding free, the program's memory footprint grows uncontrollably until the system runs out of memory. This failure to release memory after its effective lifetime makes it unavailable for reuse, often resulting from overlooked error paths or improper reference counting in data structures.
Dangling pointers, also known as use-after-free errors, happen when a program attempts to access memory that has already been deallocated, treating the pointer as valid despite the underlying memory being invalid or reallocated for other purposes. A typical example in C involves freeing a buffer with free(ptr) and then dereferencing ptr later in the code, such as in a conditional branch where the pointer is used without checking its state. This can lead to reading or writing to arbitrary memory locations, corrupting data or enabling exploits.
Double-free and invalid free errors arise from attempting to deallocate the same memory address multiple times or freeing memory that was not allocated via the heap (e.g., stack variables or null pointers). In C, a simple double-free might look like free(ptr); ... free(ptr); without nulling the pointer in between, which corrupts the memory management data structures maintained by the allocator. Invalid frees, such as calling free on a stack-allocated array, similarly disrupt the heap's integrity by passing invalid pointers to the deallocation routine.
Buffer overflows and underflows involve writing or reading data beyond the boundaries of allocated memory buffers, either on the stack or heap. On the stack, this often occurs with fixed-size arrays, as in char buf; strcpy(buf, src); where src exceeds 10 bytes, overwriting adjacent stack frames including return addresses. Heap-based variants happen with dynamically allocated buffers, such as using strcpy on a malloc-ed block without bounds checking, potentially corrupting heap metadata and enabling arbitrary memory writes. Underflows mirror this by accessing below the buffer's start.
These errors commonly result in system crashes, denial-of-service conditions through resource exhaustion or instability, and severe security vulnerabilities that allow attackers to execute arbitrary code or escalate privileges. For example, buffer overflows have been exploited in high-profile incidents like the Heartbleed vulnerability (CVE-2014-0160), where a heap buffer over-read in OpenSSL exposed sensitive data across millions of servers. Use-after-free flaws, such as in CVE-2024-9680 affecting Mozilla Firefox, have enabled remote code execution by manipulating freed objects. Double-free issues, exemplified by CVE-2025-49667 in Microsoft Windows, can lead to kernel memory corruption and privilege escalation. Tools like Valgrind's Memcheck can detect many of these at runtime, reporting leaks, invalid accesses, and double-frees with stack traces for diagnosis, though they introduce performance overhead.

Prevention and Best Practices

To prevent common memory errors like leaks, double frees, and buffer overflows in manual memory management, developers should adopt structured coding practices that ensure balanced allocation and deallocation. One key practice is to pair every memory allocation with a corresponding deallocation within the same function or module, maintaining the same level of abstraction to localize operations and reduce the risk of mismatches. In languages without exception handling like C, this can be achieved through explicit cleanup patterns, such as using conditional checks or goto statements for error paths to ensure deallocation occurs even on failure. Additionally, always check pointers returned from allocation functions for NULL to handle allocation failures gracefully, often using assertions in debug builds to catch invalid states early during development.
Tools play a crucial role in detecting potential issues before runtime failures occur. Static analyzers, such as the Clang Static Analyzer, perform path-sensitive analysis on source code to identify unpaired allocations, use-after-free bugs, and other memory mismanagement without executing the program. Commercial tools like Coverity extend this by scanning large codebases for defects, including memory leaks and invalid accesses, with high precision in C and C++ projects. For dynamic analysis, Valgrind's Memcheck tool instruments programs at runtime to track every memory access, detecting leaks by reporting unfreed blocks and invalid reads/writes with stack traces. Similarly, AddressSanitizer integrates with compilers like Clang and GCC to detect heap, stack, and global buffer overflows, use-after-free, and other errors with minimal runtime overhead, typically around 2x slowdown.
Language-specific guidelines further standardize safe practices. The C++ Core Guidelines emphasize managing resources through clear ownership rules, recommending that allocations be freed in symmetric counterparts to initialization and avoiding raw pointers for ownership where possible. Modular design principles, such as encapsulating memory operations within functions or classes, help localize deallocation logic and prevent global state interference. The SEI CERT C Coding Standard reinforces this by advising developers to free memory only once and store new values in pointers immediately after allocation to avoid dangling references.
Testing approaches should verify memory behavior systematically. Unit tests can measure memory usage by comparing allocation counts before and after function calls, using frameworks like Google Test integrated with custom trackers for leak detection in C++. Fuzzing tools, such as libFuzzer, generate random inputs to stress-test code boundaries, effectively uncovering buffer overflows by simulating edge-case data flows in C and C++ applications.

Resource Management Patterns

RAII Principle

The Resource Acquisition Is Initialization (RAII) principle is a programming idiom that ties the lifecycle of a resource to the lifetime of an object, ensuring that resources are acquired during object initialization (typically in the constructor) and released automatically during object destruction (in the destructor). This approach was formalized by Bjarne Stroustrup in 1994 as part of C++'s resource management model, integrating it with exception handling to provide deterministic cleanup.
In practice, RAII leverages language features like automatic destructor invocation upon scope exit, guaranteeing that resources are freed regardless of how control flow exits the scopewhether normally or via an exception. This mechanism supports the strong exception safety guarantee, where operations either complete fully or leave the program state unchanged, preventing partial resource acquisition that could lead to inconsistencies.
The primary benefits of RAII include the elimination of resource leaks along both normal execution paths and exceptional ones, as destructors ensure cleanup without relying on explicit programmer intervention. For instance, RAII can manage file handles by opening the file in the constructor and closing it in the destructor, or handle mutex locks by acquiring them on initialization and releasing them automatically, thus avoiding deadlocks or forgotten releases. By preventing common memory errors such as leaks, RAII enhances code reliability in manual memory management environments.
However, RAII is inherently tied to languages that support deterministic destruction semantics, such as C++, and is less applicable to non-object-oriented resources that cannot be encapsulated within scoped objects. It also demands careful design to handle heap-allocated objects, where explicit deletion may still be needed alongside automatic mechanisms to avoid issues like double deletion.

Smart Pointers and Wrappers

Smart pointers and wrappers implement the RAII principle specifically for managing dynamically allocated memory in languages with manual memory management, ensuring automatic deallocation upon scope exit or loss of ownership. These constructs encapsulate raw pointers within objects that handle acquisition and release semantics, reducing the risk of leaks and dangling pointers without introducing full garbage collection.
In C++, std::unique_ptr, introduced in the C++11 standard, provides exclusive ownership of a dynamically allocated object, guaranteeing that only one unique_ptr instance manages the resource at a time. It is move-only, preventing copying to enforce single ownership, and automatically invokes the destructor of the managed object (typically via delete) when the unique_ptr goes out of scope or is reset. To support flexible deallocation, std::unique_ptr uses a customizable deleter type as a template parameter; for instance, a lambda or functor can replace the default std::default_delete to handle non-standard cleanup, such as freeing memory allocated with malloc. The following example demonstrates std::unique_ptr managing memory allocated via malloc:
#include <memory>
#include <cstdlib>

int main() {
 std::unique_ptr<int, void(*)(void*)> ptr(malloc(sizeof(int)), free);
 // Use *ptr or ptr.get() for access
 // Automatic free on scope exit
}
This approach ensures deterministic cleanup while allowing integration with legacy C-style allocation.
For scenarios requiring shared ownership, C++11's std::shared_ptr employs reference counting to track the number of owners, storing a shared control block that increments a strong reference count on construction or copy and decrements it on destruction or reset; the managed object is deleted only when the count reaches zero. Custom deleters are also supported, passed as arguments to constructors and invoked during final release. To address circular references that can prevent deallocationwhere two shared_ptr instances point to each other, keeping the count above zerostd::weak_ptr provides a non-owning reference that does not increment the strong count but allows checking for validity via expired() or safe access via lock(), which returns a shared_ptr if the object still exists. This mechanism breaks cycles by converting strong references to weak ones where appropriate. An example of shared_ptr with a cycle-prone structure mitigated by weak_ptr:
#include <memory>

struct Node {
 std::shared_ptr<Node> next;
 std::weak_ptr<Node> prev; // Weak to avoid cycle
};

int main() {
 auto node1 = std::make_shared<Node>();
 auto node2 = std::make_shared<Node>();
 node1->next = node2;
 node2->prev = node1; // No cycle due to weak_ptr
 // Both deallocated when main exits
}
Reference counting in shared_ptr incurs some overhead from atomic operations on the control block but enables thread-safe sharing.
In Rust, which blends manual memory management with ownership rules enforced at compile time, Box serves as a smart pointer for unique ownership of heap-allocated data, automatically deallocating the contents via the Drop trait implementation when the Box goes out of scope. Unlike C++ unique_ptr, Box integrates seamlessly with Rust's borrow checker, preventing aliasing issues without runtime checks, and supports moving ownership explicitly. For example:
fn main() {
 let boxed: Box<i32> = Box::new(5);
 // *boxed for access; drops and deallocates on scope exit
}
This provides RAII-like safety for heap allocations in a systems language.
In C, where no built-in smart pointers exist, manual equivalents can be created using structs that embed the raw pointer alongside a function pointer for cleanup, simulating RAII by invoking the callback during explicit or wrapper-mediated deallocation. Such wrappers often require discipline to ensure the cleanup is called, as C lacks automatic destructor invocation; for instance, a struct might include a void (deleter)(void) field initialized to free, called by a custom dispose function. This approach, while error-prone without language support, allows localized resource management in libraries.

Performance Implications

Efficiency Benefits

Manual memory management provides predictability in execution times, particularly in real-time and embedded systems where garbage collection pauses can violate timing constraints. Unlike automatic garbage collection, which introduces unpredictable pauses during memory reclamation, manual approaches allow developers to ensure deterministic allocation and deallocation behaviors, avoiding interruptions that could exceed deadlines. For instance, custom allocators designed for hard real-time environments achieve bounded worst-case execution times, such as approximately 165 cycles (around 0.5 s on a 300 MHz Cortex-M4 processor) for allocation operations. This predictability is crucial for systems like avionics or automotive controls, where even brief pauses from GC could lead to failures.
The low overhead of manual memory management stems from direct control over allocations, eliminating the need for metadata structures like GC roots that tracing collectors require to identify live objects. Without the runtime tracing and root scanning inherent in GC systems, manual methods reduce CPU cycles spent on memory management, making them faster for frequent small allocations common in performance-critical applications. Benchmarks demonstrate that explicit memory management can achieve better page-level locality and use half or fewer pages compared to GC, minimizing paging overhead in memory-constrained scenarios.
Optimization potential is a key efficiency benefit, as manual management enables custom allocators tailored to specific workloads, often yielding substantial performance gains. Google's TCMalloc, for example, uses thread-local caching to minimize lock contention in multi-threaded server environments, resulting in a 30% improvement in MySQL query throughput compared to standard allocators. In broader server benchmarks, while garbage collection can sometimes achieve up to 70% higher throughput than manual C++ in very tight memory conditions (e.g., 2x heap size relative to working set), manual implementations generally show advantages in high-throughput tasks like database serving or web applications under typical loads.

Overhead and Limitations

Manual memory management incurs runtime overhead primarily through the costs associated with explicit allocation and deallocation operations. In languages like C and C++, functions such as malloc and free involve searching for suitable free blocks, updating metadata, and potentially coalescing adjacent free spaces, which can introduce latency. Studies show that standard malloc implementations exhibit latencies that hardware accelerations can reduce by up to 50%, indicating baseline overheads significant enough to impact performance-critical paths. In multithreaded environments, this overhead escalates due to synchronization mechanisms like locks or atomic operations on shared metadata structures, leading to thread contention and increased cache misses. For instance, last-level cache (LLC) misses can rise over 10 times as thread counts increase from 1 to 8, with allocator choice causing up to 72% variance in execution time for benchmarks like xalancbmk.
A major limitation of manual memory management is memory fragmentation, which wastes heap space and can degrade performance by increasing allocation times or triggering premature out-of-memory conditions. External fragmentation occurs when free memory is split into non-contiguous blocks too small for new allocations, despite sufficient total free space, while internal fragmentation arises from allocating larger blocks than requested to satisfy alignment or sizing constraints. Seminal analyses across various allocators and workloads reveal that well-designed policies, such as best-fit address-ordered with coalescing, achieve fragmentation under 1% for many programs, but simpler segregated storage or buddy systems without coalescing can exceed 50% waste, with extreme cases reaching 180% or more in variability-prone traces. This fragmentation not only inflates memory usagepotentially by 20-50% on average in suboptimal scenariosbut also amplifies paging I/O and allocation search times, limiting scalability in long-running or memory-intensive applications.
Further limitations stem from the tight coupling of user data and allocator metadata, which pollutes processor caches and complicates optimizations like offloading to dedicated hardware cores. Scalability suffers in high-core-count systems, where software-only allocators struggle with contention, and performance becomes highly dependent on the chosen allocator's design, such as thread-local caching in ptmalloc or sharding in mimalloc. As of 2023, modern allocators like mimalloc have demonstrated fragmentation under 1% in multi-threaded benchmarks with improved scaling. While manual management avoids garbage collection pauses, its overheads and fragmentation risks make it less predictable for applications with irregular allocation patterns, often necessitating custom tuning to mitigate impacts.

References

11 Memory Management - Brown Computer Science

CS312 Lecture 23: Memory Organization and Garbage Collection

 C Structs and Dynamic Memory Allocation

 DYNAMIC MEMORY MANAGEMENT FOR EMBEDDED REAL-TIME ...

malloc - cppreference.com - C++ Reference

malloc

Fortran - IBM

4. Memory management in various languages

 History of Lisp - John McCarthy

blog dds: 2017-09-14 The Origins of Malloc

 A History of C++: 1979 1991 - Bjarne Stroustrup

 Automatic vs. Explicit Memory Management

 Dynamic Memory Management - cs.Princeton

MallocInternals - glibc wiki

 Dynamic memory allocation

Memory Allocation - Course Websites

 Fast Allocation and Deallocation with an Improved Buddy System

Object Pool - Game Programming Patterns

 The Slab Allocator: An Object-Caching Kernel Memory Allocator

 The What, The Why and the Where To of Anti-Fragmentation

free - cppreference.com - C++ Reference

CWE-415: Double Free - Common Weakness Enumeration - Mitre

https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/119.html

4. Memcheck: a memory error detector - Valgrind

https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/401.html

https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/416.html

Using freed memory - OWASP Foundation

Exploit for Double Free in Microsoft CVE-2025-49667 - Sploitus

Clang Static Analyzer Clang 22.0.0git documentation

Coverity SAST | Static Application Security Testing by Black Duck

AddressSanitizer Clang 22.0.0git documentation - LLVM

https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#r-resource-management

https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#rsl-resource-acquisition-is-initialization

 A brief introduction to C++'s model for type- and resource-safety

The Design and Evolution of C++ - Bjarne Stroustrup

 Exception Safety: Concepts and Techniques - Bjarne Stroustrup

Smart pointers (Modern C++) - Microsoft Learn

Box in std::boxed - Rust Documentation

Smart Pointer Programming Techniques - Boost

pavel-kirienko/o1heap - GitHub

 Memory Management for Real-Time Java - Hal-Inria

 Quantifying the Performance of Garbage Collection vs. Explicit ...

TCMalloc and MySQL - The GitHub Blog

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3093337.3037736

NextGen-Malloc: Giving Memory Allocator Its Own Room in the House
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion