Money supply Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 22 days ago 
Money supply
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 The money supply comprises the total quantity of money available in an economy at a given point, including physical currency in circulation, demand deposits, and other liquid assets that facilitate transactions. Central banks, such as the Federal Reserve, track and influence it through policy tools like open market operations and reserve requirements to promote economic stability. Standard measures include the monetary base (currency plus bank reserves), M1 (currency plus demand deposits and other checkable deposits), and M2 (M1 plus savings deposits, small time deposits, and retail money market funds). The Federal Reserve discontinued publication of the H.6 Money Stock Measures statistical release after the release on February 25, 2021 (covering data through January 2021), due to changes in banking regulations, including the elimination of reserve requirements and Regulation D distinctions, which made traditional M1 and M2 measures less meaningful; alternative money supply data continues to be available in the Federal Reserve's FRED database (e.g., M2SL series). Data from the M2SL series, representing seasonally adjusted M2 money stock, can be accessed programmatically via the free FRED API, which requires a free API key obtained by registering at fred.stlouisfed.org. An example Python request using the fredapi library is as follows:
# Install: pip install fredapi
from fredapi import Fred

fred = Fred(api_key='your_api_key_here') # Replace with your free API key
m2_data = fred.get_series('M2SL') # Returns pandas Series with dates and values
print(m2_data.tail()) # View recent data
An alternative using the requests library, without additional packages, is:
import requests

url = 'https://api.stlouisfed.org/fred/series/observations?series_id=M2SL&api_key=your_api_key_here&file_type=json'
response = requests.get(url)
data = response.json() # Contains 'observations' list with date and value
In economic theory, the money supply exerts a causal influence on price levels via the quantity theory of money, expressed as $ MV = PY $, where $ M $ is money supply, $ V $ is velocity, $ P $ is price level, and $ Y $ is real output; sustained growth in $ M $ exceeding $ Y $ typically generates inflation when $ V $ remains relatively stable. Empirical evidence from U.S. data corroborates this, as rapid M2 expansionssuch as the 26.6% year-over-year surge in February 2021have preceded corresponding rises in inflation rates. Controversies arise over the precision of aggregates amid financial innovations like digital payments, which may alter velocity and challenge traditional measures, yet long-term correlations between money growth and inflation persist across historical episodes, including post-2008 quantitative easing and pandemic-era stimuli.
Monitoring money supply remains crucial for assessing monetary policy effectiveness, with divergences between supply growth and nominal GDP signaling potential inflationary pressures or deflationary risks, as observed in periods of contraction like the Great Depression when supply fell sharply, exacerbating deflation. Recent U.S. M2 levels reached $22,411.0 billion (seasonally adjusted) in December 2025, reflecting ongoing adjustments to post-pandemic dynamics and underscoring the supply's role in transmitting policy to broader economic outcomes.

Conceptual Foundations

Definition and Core Principles

The money supply, sometimes referred to as the "volume of money," represents the total amount of money held by the publicconsisting of currency in circulation, coins, and balances in bank accountsavailable within an economy at a specific point in time for facilitating payments and short-term investments. Globally, the broad money supply (e.g., an M2-like aggregate including cash, checking, savings, and money market funds) is estimated at approximately $100 trillion USD as of early 2026, while physical currency (notes and coins) totals around $8-9 trillion; estimates vary depending on the definition used (narrow vs. broad measures) and source. This stock of highly liquid assets excludes less liquid forms such as long-term bonds or illiquid real estate, focusing instead on instruments that can be readily converted to cash or used directly in transactions. Central banks, such as the Federal Reserve, track and report money supply through standardized aggregates to gauge liquidity and inform monetary policy decisions.
Core to the concept is the distinction between narrow and broad measures of money supply, reflecting degrees of liquidity and moneyness. The monetary base, often denoted as M0 or high-powered money, comprises physical currency outside the central bank and commercial bank reserves held at the central bank, serving as the foundation upon which broader money is built through the banking system's credit creation process. M1 includes the monetary base plus demand deposits and other checkable deposits, representing the most liquid forms readily usable for transactions. Broader aggregates like M2 extend to include savings deposits, small-denomination time deposits, and retail money market funds, capturing assets that can be quickly mobilized but are slightly less immediate than M1 components. These definitions vary slightly by jurisdictionfor instance, the European Central Bank employs similar tiersbut emphasize empirical liquidity over theoretical speculation.
A fundamental principle is that money supply is not static but expands endogenously through interactions between central bank operations and private sector behavior. The central bank controls the monetary base via open market operations, reserve requirements, and discount lending, while commercial banks multiply this base through fractional reserve lending, creating deposit money as loans generate new claims on the system. This multiplier effect, however, is modulated by factors such as public demand for currency, banks' willingness to lend, and borrowers' creditworthiness, underscoring that money supply emerges from real economic demands rather than arbitrary fiat alone. Empirical tracking reveals that unchecked expansions can lead to inflationary pressures, as excess money chases finite goods, though velocity and output adjustments complicate direct causality.

Historical Development

The concept of money supply as a determinant of economic outcomes traces its intellectual roots to the quantity theory of money, with early articulations appearing in the 16th century amid Europe's Price Revolution. The influx of precious metals from the New World colonies increased the circulating quantity of gold and silver, leading to sustained price inflation estimated at 1% annually from 1500 to 1650. French scholar Jean Bodin, in his 1568 treatise Response to the Paradoxes of Malestroit, attributed this inflation primarily to the expanded money supply rather than debasement or other factors, providing an empirical observation linking monetary quantity to price levels. Similar insights were offered by Spanish theologian Martn de Azpilcueta around 1556, who noted that price rises in Spain correlated with the abundance of American silver.
In the 18th century, David Hume refined these ideas in his 1752 essay Of Money, arguing that a doubling of the money supply would proportionally elevate prices after adjustments in trade balances and specie flows, assuming velocity and output constancy. This built on mercantilist concerns over bullion stocks but shifted emphasis to long-run neutrality of money changes. By the 19th century, classical economists such as David Ricardo and John Stuart Mill integrated the quantity theory into broader frameworks, viewing money supplyprimarily metallic currency under gold standardsas exogenous and influential on nominal variables like prices, while real output was determined by production factors. Empirical data from bimetallic systems and banking expansions supported observations of money-induced inflation, though debates persisted on short-run dynamics.
The 20th century saw formalization and institutionalization of money supply concepts, particularly with the rise of central banking. Irving Fisher's 1911 equation MV=PTMV = PTMV=PT, where MMM denotes money supply, underscored the need for measurable aggregates to test quantity theory predictions. In the United States, the Federal Reserve began compiling systematic money stock datainitially currency plus demand depositsannually from the early 1900s, with monthly publications starting around 1947; these evolved into official M1 (narrow money for transactions) and M2 (including savings deposits) definitions by the 1950s, reflecting fractional reserve banking's role in endogenous money creation. Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz's 1963 A Monetary History of the United States empirically demonstrated money supply contractions' role in exacerbating the Great Depression, reviving monetarism and prompting central banks to target steady money growth rates in the 1970s to combat inflation. However, unstable velocity and financial innovations later diminished reliance on aggregates, shifting focus to interest rate policies.

Measurement Frameworks

Traditional Aggregates

Traditional monetary aggregates consist of hierarchical classifications of money supply components, ordered by degrees of liquidity, originating from central bank frameworks in the mid-20th century to monitor economic liquidity and inform policy. These measures, primarily M0, M1, M2, and M3, capture currency, deposits, and quasi-money assets, with definitions varying slightly across jurisdictions but sharing core principles of expanding from highly liquid transaction media to savings instruments.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve discontinued publication of the H.6 Money Stock Measures statistical release after the edition on February 25, 2021, covering data through January 2021. This decision stemmed from changes in banking regulations, including the elimination of reserve requirements and revisions to Regulation D that removed distinctions between certain deposit types, rendering traditional M1 and M2 measures less meaningful for analysis. Alternative money supply data continue to be available in the Federal Reserve's FRED database, such as the M2SL series.
The narrowest aggregate, M0 or the monetary base, comprises currency in circulation (notes and coins held by the public and non-bank entities) plus commercial bank reserves deposited at the central bank. This base money, also termed high-powered money, directly reflects central bank liabilities and serves as the foundation for broader money creation via fractional reserve banking. Central banks like the Federal Reserve report M0 weekly, with U.S. levels reaching approximately $5.8 trillion as of late 2023, driven by quantitative easing expansions.
M1, representing narrow money for immediate transactions, includes M0's currency component (excluding vault cash) augmented by demand deposits, such as checking accounts and other highly liquid transaction accounts at depository institutions. In the U.S., M1 totaled about $18.4 trillion in October 2021 before definitional changes excluded time deposits under $100,000 and savings from M1 to reflect post-2020 regulatory shifts allowing unlimited transfers. Excluding such adjustments, traditional M1 emphasizes money readily spendable without conversion.
M2 builds on M1 by adding less liquid but convertible assets, including savings deposits, small-denomination time deposits (under $100,000), and retail money market fund balances. This intermediate aggregate, tracked monthly by the Federal Reserve, stood at $22,411.0 billion (seasonally adjusted) in the U.S. as of December 2025the latest available data, with January 2026 figures pending releasecapturing a significant portion of household liquidity. M2's inclusion of interest-bearing accounts reflects its role in gauging potential spending power beyond daily transactions.
M3, historically the broadest traditional aggregate in the U.S. until discontinued in 2006 due to redundancy with M2 for policy forecasting, incorporated M2 plus large time deposits, institutional money market funds, and repurchase agreements. Other central banks retain similar broad measures; the European Central Bank defines M3 as M2 plus large deposits, securities other than shares, and money market fund shares, emphasizing long-term liquidity trends in the euro area. The Bank of England, post-2010 reforms, shifted from M3 to broader M4 equivalents but maintains M0 for base money tracking. Variations arise from national financial structures, such as the ECB's inclusion of interbank repos in M3, contrasting U.S. exclusions of certain institutional funds. These aggregates, while foundational, face challenges from financial innovation blurring liquidity lines, yet remain staples for cross-country comparisons.

Alternative and Advanced Measures

Broader simple-sum monetary aggregates extend traditional measures to include less liquid but still money-like assets. In the United States, M3 comprised M2 plus large time deposits, institutional money market funds, repurchase agreements, and Eurodollars, capturing institutional liquidity not reflected in narrower gauges. The Federal Reserve discontinued M3 publication in March 2006, arguing it provided minimal additional insight into economic trends beyond M2.
In the United Kingdom, M4 functions as the Bank of England's headline broad money metric, encompassing sterling notes and coins plus all private sector depositsretail and wholesalewith UK monetary financial institutions. This aggregate reached 3,146,649 million GBP in July 2025, reflecting ongoing credit and deposit dynamics.
Advanced measures mitigate flaws in simple-sum aggregates, which equate all components regardless of liquidity differences, by applying economic theory to weight assets by their monetary services. Divisia aggregates, pioneered by William A. Barnett, derive from index number and aggregation theory to quantify the flow of liquidity services, with weights based on each asset's user costthe opportunity cost of holding it relative to alternatives.
Divisia construction dynamically adjusts weights using relative prices and yields, avoiding the perfect substitutability assumption of simple sums that distorts measurement amid financial innovation. The Center for Financial Stability's U.S. Divisia series spans levels from DM1 (currency and checking deposits) to DM4 (incorporating commercial paper, securities, and credit card services), with variants like DM4- excluding Treasuries to emphasize privately produced inside money.
These aggregates demonstrate superior empirical performance, exhibiting stronger links to nominal GDP and better forecasting of inflation and output compared to simple-sum counterparts. Broad Divisia measures, for example, more accurately tracked post-Great Financial Crisis nominal GDP recovery by accounting for service flows rather than nominal quantities. In July 2025, CFS Divisia M4- expanded 4.6% year-over-year, highlighting persistent monetary expansion.
Austrian economists propose the True Money Supply (TMS) as an alternative, defined by Murray Rothbard and Joseph Salerno to include only highly liquid mediums of exchange: currency, demand deposits, and savings deposits, deliberately excluding time deposits and money market funds viewed as non-monetary investments. This measure prioritizes the supply of exchange media over broader liquidity, aiming to reveal inflationary pressures obscured by official aggregates.

Mechanisms of Money Creation

Central banks create the monetary base, consisting of currency in circulation and reserves held by commercial banks, primarily through open market operations, in which they purchase government securities or other assets from banks or the public. When the central bank buys an asset, it credits the seller's bank account with reserves, thereby injecting new base money into the system without requiring prior funding, as the central bank has the unique authority to expand its balance sheet. This process directly increases the reserves available to commercial banks, which serve as the foundation for broader money expansion. For instance, the Federal Reserve's open market purchases, such as those conducted during quantitative easing programs from 2008 onward, expanded the U.S. monetary base from approximately $800 billion in 2008 to over $4 trillion by 2014.
Commercial banks, operating under fractional reserve systems, generate the majority of broad money aggregates like M1 and M2 through the extension of credit, where loan origination simultaneously creates new deposits. Upon approving a loan, a bank records the loan as an asset on its balance sheet and credits the borrower's deposit account with the loan amount, effectively creating money ex nihilo, as this deposit functions as spendable money while the corresponding liability is the bank's promise to pay. This mechanism, often termed endogenous money creation, is driven by borrower demand for credit rather than exogenous injections from the central bank, with banks subsequently acquiring reserves to meet settlement needs through interbank markets or central bank facilities. Empirical studies confirm this process: analysis of UK bank balance sheet data from 19862014 showed that changes in loans precede and determine deposits, not vice versa, contradicting the traditional money multiplier model. Constraints on this expansion include regulatory capital requirements, liquidity coverage ratios, and profitability assessments, rather than fixed reserve ratios, especially since many jurisdictions, including the U.S. since March 2020, have set reserve requirements to zero.
Government fiscal deficits can indirectly facilitate money creation when financed through debt issuance purchased by commercial banks or the central bank, leading to deposit expansion. If banks buy government bonds using newly created deposits from lending cycles, or if the central bank monetizes debt via asset purchases, this channels base money into broader circulation. However, in systems with independent central banks prohibiting direct deficit financing, such as the European Central Bank's prohibition on monetary financing under Article 123 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, this pathway is limited, emphasizing market-based debt absorption. Overall, these mechanisms underscore that money supply growth is predominantly a byproduct of credit decisions by private institutions, modulated by central bank policy settings.

Theoretical Frameworks

Quantity Theory and Monetarism

The quantity theory of money asserts that long-run changes in the money supply determine proportional changes in the general price level, holding velocity of circulation and real output constant. This relationship is captured in the equation of exchange, MV=PQMV = PQMV=PQ, where MMM denotes the money supply, VVV the average velocity of money (transactions per unit of money), PPP the price level, and QQQ the volume of goods and services produced. Irving Fisher formalized the equation as MV=PTMV = PTMV=PT in his 1911 work The Purchasing Power of Money, emphasizing that increases in MMM beyond growth in TTT (transactions approximating output) lead to inflation. The theory traces to earlier thinkers like David Hume but gained analytical rigor through Fisher's cash transaction approach, positing money's role as a medium facilitating exchange rather than a store of value driver.
Monetarism represents a modern restatement and empirical defense of the quantity theory, pioneered by Milton Friedman. In his 1956 essay "The Quantity Theory of Money: A Restatement," Friedman reframed it as a theory of money demand, where velocity emerges as a stable function of interest rates, income, and institutional factors rather than a fixed constant. Monetarists argue that discretionary fiscal and monetary policies destabilize economies, advocating instead a rules-based approach: steady money supply growth at 3-5% annually to match long-term real GDP expansion and prevent inflation or deflation. Friedman's seminal 1963 book A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, co-authored with Anna Schwartz, provided empirical support by attributing the Great Depression's severity to the Federal Reserve's failure to counteract a one-third contraction in the money stock from 1929 to 1933, exacerbating bank failures and deflation.
Central to monetarism is the dictum that "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon," reflecting evidence from hyperinflations (e.g., post-WWI Germany, where money growth exceeded 300% monthly correlating with price surges) and cross-country data showing high inflation tied to excessive money creation. Friedman's analysis of U.S. data from 1867-1960 demonstrated that monetary disturbances preceded most economic cycles, with output stabilizing quickly after shocks while prices adjusted proportionally. Policy implications include targeting broad money aggregates like M2 over interest rates, as unstable velocity in short runs (e.g., post-2008 declines amid low inflation despite quantitative easing) challenges fine-tuning but reinforces long-run neutrality where money affects nominal but not real variables. Critiques highlight velocity's empirical variabilitydeclining sharply in liquidity traps or rising in financial innovationsundermining strict proportionality, though monetarists counter that predictable functions suffice for policy rules over discretionary interventions prone to time lags and errors.

Keynesian and Demand-Side Perspectives

In Keynesian economics, the money supply influences economic activity primarily through its effect on interest rates rather than directly determining prices or output via a fixed velocity, as posited in the quantity theory. John Maynard Keynes argued in The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (1936) that the demand for money arises from three motives: transactions (for everyday purchases), precautionary (for unforeseen needs), and speculative (to avoid capital losses on bonds when interest rates are expected to rise). The speculative motive links money demand inversely to interest rates, as higher rates reduce the appeal of holding non-yielding cash over interest-bearing assets. With money supply controlled exogenously by the central bank, equilibrium interest rates equilibrate money supply and demand, thereby affecting investment decisions and aggregate demand.
This framework underpins the IS-LM model, formalized by John Hicks in 1937 to represent Keynesian equilibrium in goods and money markets. The LM (liquidity-money) curve depicts combinations of income and interest rates where money market clears, sloping upward because higher income raises transactions demand for money, requiring higher interest rates to curb speculative hoarding given fixed money supply. An increase in money supply shifts the LM curve rightward, lowering interest rates and boosting investment, which expands output along the IS (investment-savings) curve. Empirical applications, such as U.S. Federal Reserve data from the 1960s showing monetary expansions correlating with lower short-term rates and higher GDP growth, illustrate this transmission, though lags and expectations can weaken effects.
Demand-side perspectives extend this by emphasizing money supply adjustments as a countercyclical tool to stimulate deficient aggregate demand during recessions, prioritizing output stabilization over strict inflation control. Keynesians contend that in liquidity trapswhere interest rates near zero and money demand becomes infinitely elasticfurther money supply increases fail to lower rates, as seen in Japan's 1990s stagnation with near-zero rates despite Bank of Japan expansions exceeding 100% of GDP. Fiscal policy often complements monetary easing, but demand-side advocates like Paul Samuelson highlighted money supply's role in fine-tuning, with post-World War II U.S. growth averaging 3.8% annually amid managed expansions. Critics, including monetarists, note that such views overlook long-run neutrality, where money supply growth fuels inflation without sustainable output gains, as evidenced by 1970s stagflation when U.S. M1 growth averaged 7.5% amid double-digit inflation. Nonetheless, Keynesian analysis privileges demand deficiencies as causal, with money supply serving as a lever rather than the fundamental driver.

Austrian and Supply-Side Critiques

The Austrian School of economics fundamentally critiques the central bank's ability to expand the money supply through fiat mechanisms, viewing it as a primary driver of economic instability via the Austrian Business Cycle Theory (ABCT). Developed by Ludwig von Mises in the 1910s and elaborated by Friedrich Hayekwho received the Nobel Prize in 1974 partly for this frameworkABCT posits that when central banks inject new money into the economy, often by purchasing assets or lowering reserve requirements, it artificially suppresses interest rates below their natural market-clearing levels determined by savings and time preferences. This distortion misallocates resources toward unsustainable, capital-intensive projects (malinvestments), such as overexpansion in durable goods sectors, fostering a boom phase that inevitably collapses into recession when the money-fueled imbalances are revealed, as seen in the 2008 financial crisis where Federal Reserve credit expansion from 20012006 contributed to housing malinvestments.
Austrians argue that fiat money systems, severed from commodity anchors like gold since the U.S. abandoned the gold standard in 1971, enable unchecked money supply growthU.S. M2 expanded over 40-fold from $600 billion in 1971 to $21 trillion by 2021predisposing economies to inflation and cycles, as the money supply is no longer constrained by real savings or mining output but by political and bureaucratic decisions. They reject fractional-reserve banking under central oversight, contending it amplifies credit creation beyond depositor funds, with historical precedents like the Panic of 1907 illustrating how such systems propagate fragility absent full-reserve or free-banking alternatives. Empirical support draws from interwar periods, where credit booms preceded the Great Depression, aligning with Hayek's 1930s warnings that monetary expansion mismatches investment with consumer goods production.
Supply-side economists, building on thinkers like Robert Mundell and Arthur Laffer, critique discretionary money supply expansions for undermining productive incentives by generating inflation uncertainty, which erodes real returns on savings and investment essential for supply expansion. Unlike demand-focused Keynesian policies, they emphasize that rapid money growthsuch as the U.S. Federal Reserve's M2 surge of 26% in 20202021imposes an implicit tax on capital accumulation, discouraging entrepreneurship and labor supply while favoring short-term speculation over long-term productivity gains. This view holds that stable, rule-based monetary growth, ideally tied to nominal GDP targets around 35% annually to match real output plus mild inflation, supports supply-side reforms like tax cuts, as erratic expansions distort relative prices and hinder the Laffer Curve dynamics where lower effective tax burdens from stable money foster revenue through growth. Historical evidence includes the 1980s U.S. experience, where Paul Volcker's tight policy curbed money supply growth from double digits to under 5% by 1983, facilitating Reagan-era supply-side deregulation and a productivity boom without reigniting stagflation. Supply-siders thus advocate monetary restraint to complement fiscal incentives, warning that unchecked supply increases fuel asset bubbles and crowd out private investment, as modeled in analyses showing monetary shocks prolong output effects via firm entry barriers.

Empirical Analysis

Links to Inflation and Economic Cycles

The quantity theory of money posits that sustained increases in money supply beyond the growth of real output lead to proportional rises in price levels, assuming relatively stable velocity of circulation. Empirical analyses confirm a long-run one-to-one relationship between money growth and inflation across advanced economies from 1870 to 2020, with deviations primarily attributable to short-term velocity fluctuations or output shocks. In the United States, historical data show that periods of rapid M2 expansion, such as the 40% surge from February 2020 to February 2022, preceded peak CPI inflation of 9.1% in June 2022, illustrating the causal lag where monetary expansion fuels price pressures after demand absorbs excess liquidity.
Regarding economic cycles, expansions in money supply typically coincide with booms by lowering interest rates and stimulating credit, fostering investment and consumption until inflationary pressures emerge. Contractions or decelerations in money growth, conversely, correlate with recessions, as evidenced by the 31% decline in U.S. M2 during the Great Depression from 1929 to 1933, which exacerbated deflation and output collapse according to monetarist interpretations. Post-World War II U.S. data reveal that deviations from steady 3-5% money growth rates precede business cycle turning points, with accelerations generating overheating and subsequent Federal Reserve tightenings inducing slowdowns. While short-term correlations can weaken due to financial innovation or velocity changes, long-term evidence supports money supply variability as a primary driver of both inflationary episodes and cyclical fluctuations, rather than mere coincidence.

Velocity Dynamics and Measurement Issues

The velocity of money, $ V $, quantifies the rate at which money circulates in the economy, derived from the equation of exchange $ MV = PQ $, where $ M $ is the money supply, $ P $ the price level, and $ Q $ real output (often proxied by nominal GDP divided by $ M $). Historically, U.S. M2 velocity peaked above 2.2 in the late 1990s but has trended downward, falling to around 1.4 by mid-2025, with sharper declines following major shocks like the 2008 financial crisis and 2020 pandemic lockdowns. This secular decline reflects structural factors such as shifts toward service-oriented economies, where transactions require less money per unit of output, and increased money hoarding amid low interest rates and uncertainty.
Velocity dynamics exhibit procyclical patterns, rising during expansions as transactions accelerate and falling in recessions due to heightened liquidity preference and reduced spending; for instance, M2 velocity dropped over 20% from 2007 to 2010 amid credit contraction and precautionary savings. Post-1980, volatility has increased, with velocity responding asymmetrically to shocksdeclining more persistently after negative events than recovering after positivespartly due to policy responses like quantitative easing that expand $ M $ without proportional transaction growth. Monetarist views posit long-term predictability if money growth is steady, yet empirical trends challenge assumptions of constancy, as velocity has halved since 1970 despite stable nominal income growth, attributing variations to endogenous factors like risk premia and financial innovation rather than exogenous stability.
Measuring velocity poses inherent challenges, as it cannot be observed directly but is inferred from $ V = \frac{\text{Nominal GDP}}{M} $, relying on accurate aggregation of disparate data prone to revisions and definitional inconsistencies. GDP captures only final goods and services, excluding intermediate transactions, financial intermediation, and shadow economy activities, which understate total velocity by focusing on income-side rather than comprehensive transaction measures like the Fisher ideal index. Choice of $ M $ aggregate exacerbates issues: narrow measures like M1 overstate velocity in cash-heavy eras, while broad M2 incorporates time deposits with varying liquidity, leading to divergences; for example, post-2020 shifts in savings accounts distorted M2 calculations. Quarterly GDP revisions can retroactively alter velocity by 5-10%, and failure to adjust for velocity's non-stationaritytrending downward due to demographic aging and technological storage efficienciescomplicates econometric modeling and policy inference. Critiques highlight that apparent instability stems partly from these measurement artifacts, not inherent unpredictability, though Austrian perspectives argue velocity's endogeneity to credit cycles defies stable functional forms assumed in monetarist frameworks.

Evidence Against Declining Relevance

The sharp expansion of broad money aggregates during the COVID-19 pandemic provided empirical evidence reaffirming their relevance to inflationary dynamics. In the United States, M2 money supply surged by approximately 40% from early 2020 to its peak in April 2022, preceding a spike in consumer price inflation that reached 9.1% year-over-year in June 2022, the highest since 1981. This lagged correlation aligns with quantity theory predictions, where excessive money growth relative to output capacity manifests in higher prices after a delay of 12 to 18 months.
Subsequent contraction in money supply has coincided with disinflation, further underscoring the linkage. U.S. M2 declined by about 4% from its 2022 peak through mid-2023the first sustained shrinkage since the Great Depressionparalleling a drop in core PCE inflation from 5.6% in February 2022 to around 2.5% by late 2023. Forecasts incorporating money growth rates outperformed traditional models in anticipating the 2021-2022 inflation upsurge, demonstrating predictive power even amid financial innovations and velocity fluctuations that had previously cast doubt on aggregates' stability.
Monetarist frameworks maintain that money supply remains a primary driver of nominal income over the medium term, with empirical studies confirming stable long-run relationships between monetary aggregates and price levels despite short-term instabilities. For instance, Divisia monetary indexes, which weight components by liquidity and user costs, exhibit stronger stability in money demand functions compared to simple-sum measures, supporting the enduring causal role of money in economic cycles. These findings counter narratives of irrelevance by highlighting how policy-induced monetary expansions, such as quantitative easing, continue to influence aggregate demand and price stability through credit and deposit channels.

Policy and Institutional Dimensions

Central Banking and Targeting Regimes

Central banks exert primary control over the money supply in modern fiat systems through instruments such as open market operations, reserve requirements, and the discount rate, which influence the monetary base and, via the money multiplier, broader aggregates like M1 and M2. Under historical commodity standards, such as the gold standard prevailing until the early 20th century in many economies, money supply was constrained by physical reserves, limiting central bank discretion; the U.S. Federal Reserve, established in 1913, initially operated within this framework before transitioning to greater flexibility post-World War I. The abandonment of the Bretton Woods system in 1971 marked a shift to pure fiat money, enabling central banks to expand the money supply without metallic backing, which facilitated discretionary policies but also contributed to the high inflation of the 1970s, peaking at 14.5% in the U.S. by 1980.
In response to inflationary pressures, several central banks experimented with monetary targeting regimes in the late 1970s and 1980s, inspired by monetarist theory emphasizing steady money supply growth to achieve price stability. The U.S. Federal Reserve under Paul Volcker adopted a non-borrowed reserves targeting approach from October 1979 to October 1982, aiming to constrain M1 growth amid double-digit inflation; this "monetary experiment" induced recessions but succeeded in reducing inflation from 13.5% in 1980 to 3.2% by 1983, though it generated volatility in interest rates and money growth due to unstable relationships between reserves and broader aggregates. Similarly, the Bank of England targeted M3 from 1979 to 1986 under Thatcher-era policies, while the Bundesbank in Germany pursued a pragmatic monetary aggregate approach focused on central bank money stock, achieving lower inflation than peers; however, these efforts faltered as velocity instabilityevident in unpredictable money demandmade precise control elusive, leading to misses on targets and policy reversals. Empirical assessments indicate that while monetary targeting curbed inflation in the short term, its abandonment by the mid-1980s in most jurisdictions stemmed from technical challenges rather than inherent flaws, with some analyses attributing success in Germany to credible commitment rather than rigid adherence.
By the 1990s, a paradigm shift occurred toward inflation targeting (IT), where central banks set explicit inflation goalstypically 2%and adjust policy to meet them, often using short-term interest rates as the operational target instead of money supply quantities. New Zealand pioneered formal IT in 1990, followed by Canada (1991), the UK (1992), and others; by 2025, over 40 central banks, including the European Central Bank (adopting a 2% medium-term target in 1998, refined in 2021) and the Federal Reserve (implicitly via its 2% goal since 2012), employ this framework, which prioritizes price stability over direct money supply control. Under IT, central banks accommodate money supply fluctuations by targeting interest rates through corridor systems or ample reserves frameworks, as seen in the Fed's post-2008 shift to paying interest on reserves, which decoupled operational tactics from aggregate quantities; this approach assumes stable inflation expectations anchor outcomes, but critics note it may overlook excessive money growth, as evidenced by M2 surges preceding the 2021-2022 inflation spike exceeding 9% in the U.S. and eurozone.
Despite the dominance of IT, monetary targeting persists in select contexts, such as the Swiss National Bank's monitoring of monetary base alongside exchange rate interventions, and some emerging markets retain hybrid regimes blending aggregates with inflation goals. Post-2020 developments, including pandemic-induced expansions where U.S. M2 grew 40% from February 2020 to February 2022, prompted debates on reintegrating money supply metrics, with the ECB incorporating them into its 2021 strategy review amid critiques that pure interest rate targeting amplifies financial instability. Empirical evidence from the 1979-1982 U.S. episode underscores that rule-based aggregate control can enforce discipline absent in discretionary regimes, though implementation requires addressing velocity variances through broader measures like Divisia aggregates; nonetheless, no major central bank has reverted to exclusive monetary targeting as of 2025, reflecting institutional inertia and the perceived tractability of interest rate tools in low-inflation environments.

Fiat Money Systems vs. Sound Money Alternatives

Fiat money systems derive their value from government decree and public trust in the issuing authority, rather than from backing by a physical commodity, enabling central banks to expand the money supply through mechanisms like open market operations and reserve requirements. In contrast, sound money alternatives, such as gold or silver standards, anchor currency to a scarce commodity with intrinsic value, limiting monetary expansion to the growth of that commodity's supply and enforcing fiscal restraint via convertibility clauses. These systems historically prevailed until the 20th century, with the U.S. abandoning the gold standard domestically in 1933 and internationally via the 1971 Nixon Shock, shifting to pure fiat regimes.
Under fiat systems, money supply growth often exceeds economic output, correlating with elevated inflation rates; empirical analysis of 19th- and 20th-century episodes shows average annual inflation of approximately 9.17% during fiat periods, compared to lower rates under commodity standards. For instance, the classical gold standard era (18701914) featured near-zero average inflation across major economies, with money growth tied to gold discoveries and trade balances, fostering long-term price stability despite short-term fluctuations. Fiat regimes, however, exhibit higher variability in money growth, output, and inflation, as central banks can respond to recessions by injecting liquidityevident in the U.S. M2 expansion from $4.6 trillion in 2000 to over $21 trillion by 2022, coinciding with cumulative CPI inflation exceeding 80% post-1971.
Sound money alternatives impose automatic stabilizers by constraining governments from financing deficits through money creation, reducing incentives for chronic overspending; historical data indicate commodity standards correlated with sustained real GDP growth rates of 23% annually in adherent nations during the late 19th century, without the hyperinflation episodes seen in fiat transitions, such as Weimar Germany (19211923) or Zimbabwe (2000s). Critics of sound money, often from Keynesian perspectives, argue it exacerbates deflationary spiralsas during the Great Depression, when U.S. money supply contracted 30% from 19291933 under partial gold constraints, amplifying output declinesyet proponents counter that fiat flexibility enabled even greater distortions, like the 1970s U.S. stagflation with 13.5% peak inflation in 1980.
AspectFiat Money SystemsSound Money Alternatives (e.g., Gold Standard)
Inflation TendencyHigher average (e.g., 9.17% historically); prone to debasement via unlimited issuanceLower average (e.g., ~0% in classical era); limited by commodity scarcity
Policy FlexibilityEnables countercyclical interventions, supporting credit expansion and growth in expansionsRigid; ties money to real asset growth (~12% annually for gold), potentially constraining during downturns
Fiscal DisciplineWeaker; seigniorage funds deficits, risking moral hazardStronger; convertibility deters excessive printing, aligning spending with revenue
Empirical Growth CorrelationHigher nominal output but volatile real growth; post-1971 fiat linked to asset bubblesStable real growth (23% in 18701914); less correlated money-output volatility
Modern sound money proposals include return to commodity backing or fixed-supply digital assets like Bitcoin, which mimic scarcity without physical constraints, though empirical track records remain limited compared to historical commodity regimes. Fiat defenders highlight post-1980s successes in taming inflation through independent central banking, yet data show persistent risks of expansionary policies eroding purchasing power, as U.S. dollar lost over 96% of its 1913 value by 2023. Ultimately, commodity systems' enforced scarcity has empirically yielded superior long-term value preservation, while fiat's discretion facilitates short-term stimulus at the cost of systemic instability.

Quantitative Easing and Expansionary Policies

Quantitative easing (QE) represents an unconventional expansionary monetary policy employed by central banks to stimulate economic activity when conventional tools, such as short-term interest rate cuts, reach their effective lower bound. In QE, the central bank purchases large volumes of longer-term securities, primarily government bonds and mortgage-backed securities, from financial institutions, crediting their reserve accounts with newly created central bank money. This process directly expands the monetary base (often denoted as M0 or high-powered money) by increasing bank reserves held at the central bank. The Federal Reserve initiated QE in response to the 2008 financial crisis, launching QE1 on November 25, 2008, with purchases totaling approximately $1.75 trillion in mortgage-backed securities and agency debt by March 2010, followed by QE2 in November 2010 ($600 billion in Treasury securities) and QE3 in September 2012 (initially $40 billion per month in mortgage-backed securities, expanded to $85 billion including Treasuries, tapering by October 2014). These programs ballooned the Fed's balance sheet from about $900 billion pre-crisis to $4.5 trillion by 2014.
The transmission of QE to broader money supply aggregates like M1 and M2 is indirect and depends on banks' willingness to multiply reserves through lending, which was muted post-2008 due to high excess reserves and regulatory constraints, resulting in subdued M2 growth relative to the base expansion (M2 rose about 6-7% annually during 2009-2014, compared to pre-crisis norms). However, during the COVID-19 response, the Fed announced unlimited QE on March 23, 2020, initially targeting $500 billion in Treasuries and $200 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities, leading to a rapid balance sheet expansion to over $8 trillion by mid-2021 and a 25% year-over-year surge in M2 by February 2021, as fiscal stimulus and demand pressures amplified the multiplier effect. Empirical studies indicate QE lowered long-term yields by 50-100 basis points per program round, supporting credit availability but primarily channeling liquidity into asset markets rather than immediate consumer price inflation. 
Similar policies were adopted globally; the European Central Bank (ECB) began its Asset Purchase Programme (APP) in January 2015, purchasing 60 billion monthly in sovereign bonds and other assets, expanding to include corporate securities and extending through 2018, with the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP) adding 1.85 trillion from March 2020. This increased the ECB's balance sheet from 2 trillion in 2014 to over 8 trillion by 2022, boosting eurozone M3 (a broad money measure) growth to 10-12% annually in 2020-2021, though initial transmission was hampered by fragmented banking sectors and negative deposit rates. Expansionary policies beyond QE, such as forward guidance on low rates and targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) by the ECB, further encouraged lending but often reinforced reserve hoarding rather than proportional broad money growth.
Critics contend that QE distorts price signals and fosters asset price inflation over consumer goods, contributing to bubbles in equities, real estate, and bonds; for instance, U.S. stock indices rose over 300% from 2009 to 2021 amid QE, outpacing GDP growth, while wealth inequality widened as asset owners benefited disproportionately. Proponents, including central bank analyses, argue it averted deeper recessions by stabilizing financial markets, with evidence from vector autoregression models showing QE reduced unemployment by 0.5-1 percentage point in the U.S. and eurozone without immediate hyperinflationary risks, though lagged inflationary pressures emerged in 2021-2022 when supply disruptions coincided with prior liquidity injections. Quantitative tightening (QT), the reversal via asset runoff or sales, has been implemented cautiously since 2017 (Fed) and 2022 (ECB), contracting the base but revealing persistent excess liquidity challenges.

Global Variations and Recent Developments

Major Economies: United States and Eurozone

In the United States, the Federal Reserve tracks money supply via aggregates including M1 (currency, demand deposits, and other liquid assets) and M2 (M1 plus savings deposits, small-denomination time deposits under $100,000, and retail money market funds excluding IRA/Keogh balances). The Federal Reserve discontinued publication of the H.6 Money Stock Measures release after February 25, 2021, due to changes in banking regulations, such as the elimination of reserve requirements, rendering traditional M1 and M2 less meaningful; alternative data is available in the FRED database (e.g., M2SL series). M2 reached $22.195 trillion in August 2025, reflecting a year-over-year increase of 4.8%. From February 2020 to April 2022, M2 expanded by over 40%, from approximately $15.3 trillion to $21.7 trillion, primarily due to Federal Reserve asset purchases exceeding $4 trillion and fiscal stimulus injecting liquidity into the banking system amid COVID-19 lockdowns. This surge reversed partially with a 4.6% contraction through March 2023 as the Fed raised interest rates from near-zero to over 5% and reduced its balance sheet via quantitative tightening, shrinking bank reserves and curbing deposit growth. By mid-2025, M2 growth stabilized around 4%, supported by moderating rate cuts and steady demand for liquid assets amid economic resilience.
The monetary base (M0), comprising physical currency and bank reserves at the Fed, ballooned from $3.24 trillion in early 2020 to $8.9 trillion by mid-2022 through open market operations and emergency lending facilities, before declining to about $5.5 trillion by 2025 as excess reserves normalized. These dynamics highlight the Fed's influence via reserve requirements (effectively zero since 2020) and interest on reserves, which channeled expansions into broader aggregates without proportional base growth post-2022 due to multiplier effects from fractional lending.
In the Eurozone, the European Central Bank (ECB) emphasizes M3 as its key broad aggregate, encompassing M2 (currency, deposits redeemable on demand, short-term deposits up to two years, and money market fund shares) plus large time deposits, repurchase agreements, debt securities up to two years, and other liquid instruments. M3 totaled 16.912 trillion in August 2025, with annual growth of 2.9%, down from peaks exceeding 10% in 2020-2022. The aggregate grew by roughly 25% from 2019 to 2022 (12.5 trillion to 15.6 trillion), fueled by the ECB's 1.85 trillion Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP), expanded asset purchases under the Asset Purchase Programme (APP), and 2.5 trillion in targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) that incentivized bank lending with negative or low rates. Growth decelerated to 1-2% in 2023 amid ECB deposit facility rate hikes to 4% and APP/PEPP wind-downs, which reduced central bank liquidity and tightened interbank funding, though TLTRO repayments slowed the contraction. By August 2025, M3 expansion edged up to 2.9% year-over-year, reflecting partial rate cuts and persistent M1 components (demand and overnight deposits) growing at 5%.
PeriodUS M2 YoY Growth (%)Eurozone M3 YoY Growth (%)
202025.010.5
202113.07.2
20222.54.1
2023-2.00.5
2024 (avg.)1.51.8
2025 (Aug.)4.82.9
This table summarizes annual growth rates, sourced from official series, illustrating synchronized post-pandemic expansions followed by divergent contractionsthe US sharper due to faster balance sheet reduction, versus Eurozone persistence from fragmented banking and fiscal transfers. Both regions' supplies remain elevated relative to pre-2020 trends, with M2/M3-to-GDP ratios exceeding 90% and 120%, respectively, sustaining debates on latent inflationary risks despite subdued velocity.

Emerging Markets and Regional Differences

In emerging markets, broad money supply (M2) growth rates have generally outpaced those in advanced economies, averaging 10-15% annually in many cases during 2020-2024, driven by financial deepening, credit expansion to support infrastructure and consumption, and responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, though this has heightened inflation vulnerabilities amid weaker institutional frameworks and currency pressures. For instance, the Bank for International Settlements notes that emerging market central banks often pursue inflation targeting similar to advanced economies, but transmission is complicated by shallower financial systems and greater sensitivity to global capital flows, leading to more volatile money multipliers.
Asia exhibits some of the highest sustained money supply expansions among emerging regions, with China's M2 reaching 347.19 trillion yuan as of the end of January 2026, up 9.0% year-over-year (compared to 340.29 trillion yuan up 8.5% year-over-year at the end of December 2025), and narrow money (M1) at 117.97 trillion yuan, up 4.9% year-over-year (vs. 3.8% in December), reflecting state-directed credit growth despite efforts to curb shadow banking. In India, M2 reached 765.475 billion USD by November 2024, with annual growth around 14.1% in recent periods, fueled by digital payments and rural lending initiatives under the Reserve Bank of India. Southeast Asian economies like Indonesia and Vietnam have seen comparable 10-12% M2 growth, supported by export-led industrialization, though this contrasts with Japan's stagnant supply in developed Asia.
Latin America displays more heterogeneous patterns, often marked by boom-bust cycles tied to commodity prices and fiscal dominance, with Brazil's M2 growing 12.0% year-over-year in January 2025 amid post-pandemic stimulus, while countries like Argentina have grappled with episodic hyperinflation from unchecked monetary financing. Regional inflation spikes post-2020 were sharper here than in Asia (excluding China), per Brookings analysis, due to dollarization risks and weaker pass-through from policy rates to lending. Sub-Saharan Africa shows elevated volatility, with South Africa's M2 growth stabilizing at 6-8% under the South African Reserve Bank but Nigeria's exceeding 20% at times amid naira depreciation and oil dependency, exacerbating imported inflation.
These regional divergences stem from structural factors: Asia's supply-chain integration enables steadier credit expansion, Latin America's commodity exposure amplifies external shocks, and Africa's limited financial inclusion sustains high cash-to-deposit ratios, per IMF assessments of monetary frameworks in developing economies. Emerging markets overall face amplified spillovers from U.S. Federal Reserve tightening, which contracts local liquidity via capital outflows, unlike the more insulated advanced economies.

Fintech, Cryptocurrencies, and Post-2020 Trends

Fintech innovations, including digital payments, peer-to-peer lending platforms, and electronic money (e-money), have facilitated more efficient transaction processing but do not fundamentally expand monetary aggregates, as e-money typically represents bank deposits or claims rather than base money creation. In empirical analyses, such as in the Indian economy from 2010 to 2022, digital payment volumes showed a statistically significant positive correlation with broad money supply growth, driven by increased financial inclusion and transaction velocity rather than net supply expansion. Similarly, in Indonesia, fintech e-money exhibited no significant impact on money supply growth or velocity, underscoring that these technologies primarily redistribute existing liquidity. Fintech adoption can, however, weaken monetary policy transmission by enhancing competition for bank deposits and altering credit channels, as evidenced in cross-country studies where higher fintech penetration reduced the responsiveness of GDP, prices, and loans to interest rate changes. 
Cryptocurrencies, decentralized digital assets like Bitcoin with a programmatically capped supply of 21 million units, are excluded from official money supply measures such as M1 or M2 due to their volatility, lack of legal tender status, and limited role as a stable medium of exchange or unit of account. Empirical evidence indicates cryptocurrencies inversely affect traditional money demand, as investors shift holdings amid fiat expansions, while their prices often correlate positively with broad money growth. By October 2025, the total cryptocurrency market capitalization reached approximately $4 trillion, dwarfed by global M2 money supply estimates of $180 trillion, yet representing a non-trivial alternative store of value amid fiat debasement concerns. 
Post-2020 trends reflect accelerated monetary expansion in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, with U.S. M2 surging from $15.3 trillion in February 2020 to a peak of $21.7 trillion in April 2022, followed by contraction amid tightening, correlating with cryptocurrency bull runs in 2021 and renewed strength by mid-2025. Bitcoin's price movements have mirrored global M2 growth, rising during liquidity injections from major central banks and declining with slowdowns below 5% annual expansion, with empirical analyses indicating a typical lag of 56-107 days for peak correlation with M2 changes, 3-6 months for full quantitative easing effects to drive rallies, and 70-90 day shifts being common. Stablecoins, fiat-pegged tokens like USDT and USDC, have grown to support cross-border payments and DeFi, with supply expanding from under $20 billion in 2020 to projected hundreds of billions by 2025, functioning as tokenized extensions of existing dollar liquidity without independently altering aggregate supply. In July 2025, the U.S. Congress passed the GENIUS Act, establishing a federal framework for stablecoin issuance, potentially integrating them more formally into payment systems while reinforcing dollar dominance.
Central banks have pursued CBDCs as a counter to private fintech and crypto disruptions, with 137 countriescovering 98% of global GDPexploring retail or wholesale variants by 2025, up from 35 in May 2020. China's digital yuan (e-CNY) launched pilots in April 2020, achieving over 1.8 billion transactions by 2023, positioning it to substitute cash and influence domestic money velocity without broad supply effects in early stages. IMF analyses project CBDCs could expand central bank balance sheets if substituting deposits or reserves, potentially enhancing policy control but risking disintermediation of commercial banks and altered money multipliers. As of August 2025, 91% of surveyed central banks were researching CBDCs, with pilots emphasizing programmability for targeted stimulus, though adoption remains limited outside China due to privacy and stability concerns. These developments underscore a shift toward digitized sovereign money, aiming to reclaim control over supply amid private sector innovations.

References

What is the money supply? Is it important? - Federal Reserve Board

Money Stock Measures - H.6 Release - Federal Reserve Board

Money Supply | Richmond Fed

What Is the Quantity Theory of Money? Definition and Formula

US M2 Growth, 1960 2025 | CEIC Data

M2 (M2SL) - FRED - Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

M2 Money Supply Growth vs. Inflation - Updated Chart

The link between Money Supply and Inflation - Economics Help

 The Quantity Theory Tradition and the Role of Monetary Policy

US M2 Money Supply (Monthly) - United States - Historical D

Money Stock Measures - H.6 Release - About

Money Supply - Econlib

How Does the Federal Reserve Control the Supply of Money?

 Monetary aggregates and monetary policy at the Federal Reserve

 The quantity theory of money, 1870-2020 - European Central Bank

Monetary Aggregates and Monetary Policy at the Federal Reserve

Historical Approaches to Monetary Policy - Federal Reserve Board

The Rise and Fall of M2 | St. Louis Fed

Measurement of Monetary Aggregates across Countries

Monetary aggregates - European Central Bank

Monetary Base Explained: Definition, Components, and Examples

Monetary Base - Overview, Importance, Example

The Fed - An Update to Measuring the U.S. Monetary Aggregates

Definition of M1, M2 and M3 | Clear Capital | Glossary of Terms

 Monetary Aggregates - Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

https://www.federalreserve.gov/Releases/H6/DiscM3.htm

Further details about M3 (estimate of European monetary union ...

 Factors Underlying the Definitions of Broad Money - IMF eLibrary

H.6 Release--Discontinuance of M3 - Federal Reserve Board

Further details about M4 data | Bank of England

United Kingdom Money Supply M4 - Trading Economics

Divisia Inside Money Aggregates - The Center for Financial Stability

Constructing Divisia Monetary Aggregates for the Asian Tigers - MDPI

 NEWS RELEASE CFS DIVISIA MONETARY DATA FOR THE ...

The "True" Money Supply: A Measure of the Supply of the Medium of ...

Open Market Operations - Federal Reserve Board

Money creation in the modern economy | Bank of England

 banks and the Central Bank in the money creation process

Can banks individually create money out of nothing? The theories ...

How the Quantity Theory of Money Helps Us Understand Financial ...

https://www.tutor2u.net/economics/topics/fisher-equation

 Algebraic Quantity Equations before Fisher and Pigou

Monetarism Explained: Theory, Formula, and Keynesian Comparison

What Is Monetarism? - Back to Basics

https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691003542/a-monetary-history-of-the-united-states-1867-1960

 Friedman and Schwartz's A Monetary History of the United States ...

The Quantity Theory of Money: 1870-2020 - SUERF

Monetarism Remains a Useful Guide on Inflation - AIER

Liquidity Preference Theory Explained: Definition, History, and Key ...

Theory of Liquidity Preference - Corporate Finance Institute

Understanding the IS-LM Model: Curves, Characteristics, and ...

LM part of the IS-LM model (video) | IS-LM - Khan Academy

What Is Keynesian Economics? - Back to Basics

Keynesian Economics - Econlib

 The Austrian Theory of Business Cycles: Old Lessons for Modern ...

Austrian Business Cycle Theory, Explained - Mises Institute

The 2008 Financial Crisis: An Austrian Analysis | YIP Institute

Boom and Bust: Rethinking Austrian Business Cycle Theory

The Austrian Theory of Money - Mises Institute

Banking and Monetary Policy from the Perspective of Austrian ...

The Supply-Side Effects of Monetary Policy | NBER

Supply Side Economics - Definition, Three Pillars, Laffer Curve

 Supply-side economics: what chance for success?

Money and inflation - European Central Bank

 Money and Business Cycles - National Bureau of Economic Research

 Money and Business Cycles - National Bureau of Economic Research

 Monetary Growth and Business Cycles

Understanding the Velocity of Money: Definition, Formula, Real ...

Velocity Of Money: Definition & Formula | Seeking Alpha

Velocity of M2 Money Stock (M2V) | FRED | St. Louis Fed

Velocity of M2 Money Stock - 2025 Data 2026 Forecast 1959 Historical

Velocity in the long run: Money and structural transformation

 Money and Velocity During Financial Crisis

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4070983

Monetarism: Money Is Where It's At - Back to Basics Compilation Book

How (un)stable is velocity? - The Market Monetarist

Why We Cannot Measure Money Velocity Directly - Bond Economics

The Velocity of Money: 2017 Edition

 Measuring Instruments in Economics and the Velocity of Money - LSE

 Velocity of Money and the Practice of Monetary Targeting

 A Critique of Monetarism - Austrian Student Scholars Conference

 Nicholas Kaldor - One of the first critics of monetarism

Money and inflation - Rangvid's Blog

Inflation forecasts based on money growth proved accurate in 2021 ...

 Does Monetarism Retain Relevance?

 Is Money Demand Really Unstable? Evidence from Divisia Monetary ...

 Money Aggregates, Debt, Pent-Up Demand, and Inflation

How Central Banks Control the Supply of Money - Investopedia

A Brief History of Central Banks - Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland

The Great Inflation | Federal Reserve History

 Lessons From The 19791982 Monetary Policy Experiment

The influence of monetarism on Federal Reserve policy during the ...

Monetary Regimes and Inflation Targeting

Moving targets? Inflation targeting frameworks,19902025

International experiences with different monetary policy regimes ...

MONETARY REGIMES, MONEY SUPPLY, AND THE USA ...

How the Gold Standard Compares to a Fiat Money System

Fiat Money vs. Commodity Money: Which Is More Prone to Inflation?

Lessons Learned from the Gold Standard: Implications for Inflation ...

As Good as Gold? | Cato Institute

 Gold, Fiat Money and Price Stability

 Money, Inflation, and Output Under Fiat and Commodity Standards

Money, Inflation, and Output Under Fiat and Commodity Standards

The Gold Standard and Price Inflation

Large-Scale Asset Purchases - Federal Reserve Bank of New York

What did the Fed do in response to the COVID-19 crisis? | Brookings

How the Fed Uses Quantitative Tightening to Address Inflation

 The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates

Quantitative tightening: rationale and market impact

How to conduct monetary policies. The ECB in the past, present and ...

QE & The Assetization of the US Economy - Haver Analytics

How Quantitative Easing Actually Works | Chicago Booth Review

View of Evaluating the Effectiveness of Quantitative Easing ...

M2 Money Supply (1959-2025) - Macrotrends

US M2 Money Supply YoY (Monthly) - United States - Historic

Recent balance sheet trends - Federal Reserve Board

Euro Area Money Supply M3 - Trading Economics

Monetary aggregate M3 reported by MFIs, central gov. and post ...

Monetary developments in the euro area: August 2025

Eurozone - Money Supply | Europe Market | Collection - MacroMicro

Broad money growth (annual %) - World Bank Open Data

Monetary policy transmission in emerging markets

China M2 Money Supply (Monthly) - Historical Data & Trends

India Money Supply M2, 1994 2025 | CEIC Data

Growth Rates of Money Supply - Key Indicators Database

Brazil M2 Growth, 1971 2025 | CEIC Data

 The Resurgence of Inflation: Why Was Emerging Asia Different?

 Monetary policy rules in emerging market economies: issues and ...

https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/staff_reports/sr972.pdf

 F.7 Impact of Fintech on Macroeconomic Statistics: Outcome of ...

Investigating the Impact of Fintech on Money Supply

 FINTECH DEVELOPMENT AND MONEY SUPPLY IN INDONESIA

Financial technologies and the effectiveness of monetary policy ...

Full article: Will digital financial development affect the effectiveness ...

 New Moneys in the Digital Era - Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

 Cryptocurrencies, Money Demand, and Monetary Policy

 Are crypto markets correlated with macroeconomic factors?

How Much Money Is in the World in 2025? Shocking Figures

 Bitcoin and gold: 3 model forecasts for 2030 and beyond

The Correlation Between Bitcoin and M2 Money Supply Growth

Bitcoin's price movement mirrors global money supply - Swissquote

Bitcoin vs Major Central Banks M2 Supply - MacroMicro

 Digital Dollars - Citi

What to Know About Stablecoins | J.P. Morgan Global Research

A Historical Perspective on Stablecoins - Liberty Street Economics

Central Bank Digital Currency Tracker - Atlantic Council

Implications of Central Bank Digital Currency for Monetary ...

results of the 2024 BIS survey on central bank digital currencies and ...

Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC): Reclaim the Money Supply ...

How Expanding Global Liquidity Could Drive Bitcoin Price To New ...

M2 Money Supply and Bitcoin in 2025

Federal Reserve Board - Money Stock Measures - H.6 - Current Release

H.6 Money Stock Measures

M2 Money Stock (M2SL)

Federal Reserve H.6 Release Page

FRED API Documentation

US & Global M2 Money Supply

How Much Money Is in the World in 2026? Shocking Figures

China's yuan loans grow 4.71 trillion yuan in January
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion