MOS Technology 6502 Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
MOS Technology 6502
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 The MOS Technology 6502 is an 8-bit microprocessor developed by MOS Technology Inc. and first introduced to customers in September 1975, renowned for its affordability at a retail price of $25, which made it a pivotal component in the early personal computing revolution. It features a 16-bit address bus capable of addressing up to 64 kilobytes of memory and operates at typical clock speeds of around 1 MHz, with internal logic enabling efficient processing despite the modest external clock. Designed primarily by Chuck Peddle and a team of engineers at MOS Technology, the 6502 was created as a cost-effective alternative to more expensive processors like the Intel 8080, emphasizing simplicity, low power consumption, and compatibility with NMOS technology for broad manufacturability.
The chip's development stemmed from Peddle's prior work on the 6800 microprocessor at Motorola, where he sought to simplify it, resulting in a cleaner architecture with 56 instructions and support for zero-page addressing to optimize memory access in resource-constrained systems. MOS Technology, founded in 1969 and acquired by Allen-Bradley in 1970 before becoming independent, introduced the 6502 in 1975. It followed up with the KIM-1 single-board computer in 1976, which used the 6502 and served as an early development platform that helped popularize the processor. Its low cost and performance advantagesbeing faster and smaller than contemporariesenabled widespread adoption, powering iconic systems such as the Apple II (1977), Commodore PET (1977), Atari 400/800 (1979), and BBC Micro (1981).
Technically, the 6502 employs a non-pipelined design with an accumulator-based architecture, three general-purpose registers (A, X, Y), a stack pointer, and a program counter, supporting both binary and BCD arithmetic modes. Variants like CMOS versions such as the 65C02 (with additional instructions) extended its lifespan into the 1980s and beyond, while second-sourced chips from Rockwell and Synertek ensured availability. The processor's influence extended to gaming consoles, including the Nintendo Entertainment System (via the Ricoh 2A03 derivative) and Atari 2600, where its efficient interrupt handling and direct memory access capabilities supported real-time operations.
The 6502's legacy endures as a foundational element of computing history, embodying a design philosophy that prioritized accessibility and sparking innovations in home computing, education, and embedded systems; its open architecture even inspired modern recreations and emulations for retro computing enthusiasts. In 2025, the 6502 marked its 50th anniversary, with continued interest in emulations and hardware recreations. By enabling affordable machines that brought computing to millions, it played a crucial role in democratizing technology and laying groundwork for the personal computer industry.

History

Origins at Motorola

Chuck Peddle joined Motorola in 1973, brought on by project lead Tom Bennett to help complete the development of the MC6800 8-bit microprocessor, which was in its final stages. His primary contributions focused on system-level integration rather than the core CPU design, including the creation of the MC6821 Programmable Interface Adapter (PIA), a crucial peripheral chip that handled input/output operations for the 6800 family. Peddle also addressed timing and interfacing issues in the overall architecture, drawing from his prior experience with custom integrated circuits at earlier firms like Collins Radio.
Peddle grew increasingly frustrated with the 6800's architecture, which demanded multiple support chips to function effectively in a system, such as the MC6875 clock generator and various interface adapters, complicating board layouts and driving up manufacturing costs for potential users. Specific design elements exacerbated this, including the 8-bit bidirectional data bus that required careful signal management to avoid contention during read and write cycles, and the need for an external two-phase non-overlapping clock signal operating at up to 1 MHz, which added circuitry overhead and power consumption. These features, while innovative for enabling efficient data flow in an 8-bit system with a 16-bit address bus, made the 6800 less accessible for low-end applications compared to simpler alternatives like Intel's 4040.
Throughout 1974, as the 6800 was prepared for market release in March, Peddle traveled extensively to demonstrate the chip to potential customers and performed detailed cost analyses, concluding that a minimal 6800-based systemincluding the CPU, support chips, and basic memorywould retail for approximately $300, pricing it out of reach for hobbyists and emerging consumer electronics markets. This timeline aligned with Peddle's growing advocacy for a stripped-down, lower-cost microprocessor variant, a push that ultimately clashed with Motorola's focus on industrial and embedded applications.
The 6800 project involved a small core team of about eight engineers, including Bill Mensch, who had joined Motorola in 1971 after graduating from the University of Arizona and contributed significantly to the microprocessor's instruction set and register design. Mensch's work on simplifying data path logic helped shape the 6800's orthogonal architecture, but like Peddle, he shared concerns over the system's overall affordability and complexity.

Conception and Development at MOS Technology

In 1974, Chuck Peddle, a key engineer on Motorola's MC6800 microprocessor project, left the company along with seven colleaguesincluding Bill Mensch, Gary Ingram, and Rod Orgillto join MOS Technology, a small semiconductor firm founded in 1969 in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, by former General Instrument executives John Paivinen, Mort Jaffe, and Don McLaughlin. At MOS, Peddle advocated for the development of a low-cost standalone 8-bit microprocessor, building on the 6800 architecture but redesigned for affordability and ease of use to target broader markets beyond industrial applications.
The team's core design decisions focused on cost reduction through architectural simplifications, aiming for a retail price of $20$25 per chip in volume. Unlike the 6800's multiplexed address/data bus, which required external latches adding to system cost, the 6502 featured a dedicated 16-bit unidirectional address bus and an 8-bit bidirectional data bus, streamlining board design and reducing external components. It also adopted a simpler two-phase non-overlapping clock scheme with a single 5 V power supply, eliminating the 6800's more complex three-phase clock and dual supplies (5 V and 12 V), which further lowered manufacturing and integration expenses. These changes, combined with a hardwired programmable logic array (PLA) for instruction decoding instead of microcode, enabled an NMOS fabrication process that minimized power consumption and die size.
The transistor count was optimized to approximately 3,510 enhancement-mode devices (plus about 1,018 depletion-mode pull-ups), roughly 3040% fewer than contemporaries like the 6800 or Intel 8080, allowing efficient production on MOS's existing 8 m NMOS process. A notable innovation was the 6501 variant, engineered for drop-in compatibility with the 6800's 40-pin package and signaling, permitting existing 6800 systems to upgrade with minimal changes while offering the 6502's performance at a fraction of the cost.
Prototyping commenced in late 1974 shortly after the team's arrival, with initial schematics hand-drawn and layout work beginning by year's end; the design taped out in March 1975, yielding first functional samples by June 1975 for internal testing and early customer evaluation. This rapid development cycle, spanning less than a year, underscored MOS's focus on leveraging the team's Motorola experience to deliver a commercially viable CPU that prioritized simplicity and economic accessibility.

Launch and Legal Challenges

MOS Technology unveiled the 6502 microprocessor at the Wescon trade show in San Francisco on September 16, 1975, pricing it at $25 per unit in quantities of 100, while the pin-compatible 6501 variant, designed to directly replace the Motorola 6800, was offered at $20 per unit. This aggressive pricing strategy, far below the $360 initial cost of the Motorola 6800 or Intel 8080, aimed to disrupt the market by making microprocessor technology accessible to hobbyists and small firms, with initial production limited to samples for trade show attendees and early orders. Early customer feedback highlighted the 6502's cost-effectiveness and performance, though initial runs suffered from a hardware bug in the ROR (rotate right) instruction that rendered it non-functional, leading to reliability concerns until fixed in later revisions by early 1976.
In response to the 6501's compatibility with its 6800, Motorola filed a lawsuit against MOS Technology in November 1975, alleging patent infringement, misappropriation of trade secrets, and unfair competition based on design similarities derived from former Motorola engineers. The litigation strained MOS's resources amid low-margin sales volumes, exacerbating financial difficulties as production ramped up but legal costs mounted. The case settled out of court in March 1976, with MOS agreeing to pay Motorola $200,000, cease production of the 6501, and return confidential documents, while retaining rights to continue manufacturing and selling the 6502 without further royalties.
The lawsuit's financial toll contributed to MOS Technology's cash flow crisis, prompting its acquisition by Commodore International in October 1976 for an equity stake valued at approximately $12 million, providing stability for ongoing 6502 production. This move allowed Commodore to vertically integrate chip manufacturing, mitigating supply risks while MOS focused on scaling output to meet growing demand.

Adoption in Computing and Gaming

The MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor played a pivotal role in the early personal computing era by powering several landmark systems that democratized access to computing. The Apple I, released in 1976, and the Apple II, introduced in 1977, both utilized the 6502 as their central processor, with the Apple II series ultimately selling approximately 6 million units over its lifespan and becoming a foundational platform for hobbyists, education, and business applications. Similarly, Commodore International adopted the 6502 for its PET in 1977, VIC-20 in 1980 (over 1 million units sold), and Commodore 64 in 1982 (around 12.5 million units sold), making the latter one of the most commercially successful home computers of all time. The Atari 2600 home video game console, launched in 1977, employed the MOS 6507, a reduced version of the 6502, and achieved sales of about 30 million units, revolutionizing the gaming industry by enabling programmable entertainment in living rooms. In the United Kingdom, the BBC Micro, released in 1981 by Acorn Computers, featured the 6502 and sold roughly 1.5 million units, largely driven by its integration into the national education system through the BBC Computer Literacy Project.
In gaming, the 6502's influence extended prominently through dedicated consoles. The Atari 2600's success established it as a gaming staple, supporting titles that defined the second generation of video games. The Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), known as the Famicom in Japan and released internationally in 19831985, used a 6502 derivative called the Ricoh 2A03, which powered over 61.91 million units sold worldwide and revived the North American video game market after the 1983 crash.
The 6502's low costinitially $25 compared to competitors' $175$200 pricingenabled an affordable home computing revolution, with systems based on it or its derivatives collectively exceeding 50 million units sold and introducing millions to programming, education, and entertainment. This widespread adoption fostered innovations in software ecosystems, including early versions of BASIC interpreters tailored for the processor.
As of 2025, marking the 50th anniversary of the 6502's September 1975 launch, its legacy endures in modern contexts. In September 2025, Microsoft open-sourced the source code for its original 1976 Microsoft BASIC Version 1.1 for the 6502 under the MIT license, allowing developers to explore and extend the interpreter that powered many early systems. The processor continues to see use in embedded applications for its simplicity and low power consumption, as well as in retro computing projects like the Olimex NEO6502 board, which combines a modern 65C02 variant with contemporary peripherals for educational and hobbyist experimentation.

Programmer's Model

Registers

The MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor features a minimal register set designed for simplicity and efficiency in 8-bit computing, consisting of six primary registers: the 8-bit accumulator (A), two 8-bit index registers (X and Y), an 8-bit stack pointer (S or SP), a 16-bit program counter (PC), and an 8-bit status register (P). This limited architecture emphasizes the use of memory locations, particularly the zero page ($0000$00FF), as pseudo-registers for additional data storage and manipulation.
The accumulator (A) serves as the central register for performing arithmetic, logical, and data transfer operations, acting as the primary input and output for the ALU (arithmetic logic unit). Most instructions that read from or write to memory route data through the accumulator, making it essential for computations like addition, subtraction, AND, OR, and shifts.
The index registers X and Y are 8-bit general-purpose registers optimized for memory addressing and iteration tasks. The X register supports indexed addressing modes for indirect and zero-page operations, while Y is used for post-indexed indirect addressing and array traversal in loops, enabling efficient pointer arithmetic without additional overhead. Both can also hold temporary values, though they lack direct ALU support compared to the accumulator.
The stack pointer (SP or S) is an 8-bit register that manages the hardware stack, a fixed 256-byte region in memory from $0100 to $01FF, which grows downward from $01FF toward $0100. It points to the next available stack location for push operations (decrementing before storing) and is incremented after pops, facilitating subroutine calls, interrupts, and temporary data storage via instructions like PHA (push accumulator) and PHP (push processor status). The stack's fixed location simplifies hardware design but limits its size and relocation.
The program counter (PC) is a 16-bit register that holds the address of the next instruction to fetch and execute, incrementing automatically after each opcode retrieval. It supports the 6502's 64 KB address space and is loaded during jumps, branches, or returns from subroutines and interrupts, forming the core of sequential and non-sequential program flow.
The status register (P), also called the processor status or flags register, is an 8-bit structure where each bit represents a condition flag set or cleared by instructions to reflect operation results or processor state. The bits, ordered from MSB (bit 7) to LSB (bit 0), are: N (Negative), V (Overflow), (unused, always 1 when read or pushed to stack), B (Break), D (Decimal), I (Interrupt disable), Z (Zero), and C (Carry). The Negative flag (N) is set if the most significant bit (bit 7) of the result is 1, indicating a negative value in two's complement arithmetic. The Overflow flag (V) signals signed arithmetic overflow, set when addition or subtraction produces a result outside the representable range for 8-bit signed integers (128 to +127). The Break flag (B) is asserted on BRK instructions or certain interrupt contexts (though not hardware IRQ/NMI) and aids in debugging or software interrupts. The Decimal flag (D) enables binary-coded decimal (BCD) mode for arithmetic instructions, treating numbers as two 4-bit digits for accurate decimal calculations. The Interrupt disable flag (I) prevents maskable interrupts (like IRQ) when set, allowing critical sections of code to run uninterrupted. The Zero flag (Z) is set if the operation result is zero, used for conditional branching on equality. The Carry flag (C) indicates unsigned overflow or borrow in arithmetic, shift, and rotate operations, and is essential for multi-byte arithmetic. Flags are updated selectively by ALU instructions and can be tested for control flow decisions.

Addressing Modes

The MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor supports 13 distinct addressing modes, which determine how operands are specified and accessed from memory, enabling efficient code generation by allowing programmers to trade off between address range, speed, and instruction size. These modes leverage the processor's 16-bit address bus while optimizing for common operations like array traversal and conditional branching, with many instructions supporting multiple modes to suit different scenarios. The design emphasizes zero-page addressing for performance-critical tasks, as it reduces fetch cycles compared to full 16-bit modes.

Immediate Mode

In immediate mode, the operand is provided directly as part of the instruction, denoted in assembly as #value, where value is an 8-bit constant. This mode fetches the value inline without memory access, making it ideal for loading constants or immediate comparisons, and it typically requires 2 cycles for execution. It supports only 8-bit values due to the single-byte operand field, limiting its use to operations not requiring full address resolution.

Zero-Page Mode

Zero-page mode addresses locations in the first 256 bytes of memory (addresses $00 to $FF), using a single-byte operand for the low-order address while implying a high byte of $00. This mode is syntactically $addr and executes in 3 cycles for most load/store operations, offering a 1-2 cycle savings over absolute mode by avoiding the high-byte fetch. Programmers often reserve zero page for frequently accessed variables or pointers to maximize speed in performance-sensitive code.

Absolute Mode

Absolute mode provides full 16-bit addressing across the entire 64 KB memory space, with the operand consisting of two bytes: low byte followed by high byte, denoted as $HHHH. It requires 4 cycles for read operations, as the processor fetches both bytes before accessing the target location. This mode is essential for accessing data or code anywhere in memory but incurs higher latency than zero-page variants, making it less suitable for tight loops.

Indexed Modes

Indexed modes modify zero-page or absolute addresses by adding the contents of the X or Y index register (8-bit) to the base address, facilitating array indexing or pointer arithmetic; syntax is $addr,X or $addr,Y for zero-page and $HHHH,X or $HHHH,Y for absolute. Zero-page indexed modes take 4 cycles, while absolute indexed modes require 4 cycles if no page boundary is crossed or 5 cycles otherwise, due to an extra memory fetch on overflow. The X register is commonly used for indirect indexing, and Y for direct, with wraparound occurring on 256-byte boundaries to simplify bounded array access.

Indirect Mode

Indirect mode, denoted as (addr),loadsa16biteffectiveaddressfromthememorylocationspecifiedbytheoperand,thenusesthataddressfortheoperation;forzeropage,itis(addr), loads a 16-bit effective address from the memory location specified by the operand, then uses that address for the operation; for zero-page, it is (addr),loadsa16biteffectiveaddressfromthememorylocationspecifiedbytheoperand,thenusesthataddressfortheoperation;forzeropage,itis(addr,X) or (addr),Y.(https://www.princeton.edu/mae412/HANDOUTS/Datasheets/6502.pdf)Theabsoluteindirectvariant(addr),Y.(https://www.princeton.edu/~mae412/HANDOUTS/Datasheets/6502.pdf) The absolute indirect variant (addr),Y.(https://www.princeton.edu/mae412/HANDOUTS/Datasheets/6502.pdf)Theabsoluteindirectvariant(HHHH) is particularly bug-prone: when the low byte of the address is $FF (page boundary), the high byte of the fetched address is incorrectly read from $00 instead of the next page, affecting jump instructions. Cycle counts vary: zero-page indirect indexed modes take 5-6 cycles, providing flexible indirection for tables or vectors at the cost of additional fetches.

Relative Mode

Relative mode is used exclusively for branch instructions, where the operand is a signed 8-bit offset (-128 to +127) from the program counter, allowing conditional jumps within a local range. It executes in 2 cycles if the branch is not taken or 3 cycles if taken, promoting compact control flow in routines without full absolute jumps. This mode calculates the target by adding the offset to the address of the next instruction, enabling efficient short-range branching in assembly code.

Stack and Implied Modes

Stack mode operates implicitly on the hardware stack at $0100-$01FF, using the stack pointer register for push and pull operations without an explicit address operand; pushes decrement the stack pointer first, while pulls increment after. Implied mode requires no operand at all, relying on dedicated registers like the accumulator for operations such as shifts or transfers. Both modes are the fastest, typically 2 cycles, as they avoid address resolution entirely, with the stack providing LIFO storage for subroutines and interrupts. The accumulator implied mode is used for unary operations, enhancing code density for register-centric tasks.

Instruction Set and Opcodes

The MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor features an instruction set comprising 56 distinct instructions, implemented across 151 unique opcodes within the 8-bit opcode space of 256 possible values. These opcodes encode both the operation and, in many cases, elements of the addressing mode, following a bit pattern where the high-order bits typically specify the instruction class and the low-order bits indicate register or mode selection. The remaining 105 opcodes are undocumented in official specifications but generally execute deterministic behaviors, often as combinations or no-operations that were utilized in later systems for efficiency.

Load and Store Instructions

The load and store instructions facilitate data movement between registers and memory locations, supporting the accumulator (A), index registers X and Y, and the stack pointer (SP). Key load instructions include LDA (load accumulator), LDX (load X), and LDY (load Y), which fetch 8-bit values into their respective registers and update the negative and zero flags based on the result. Corresponding store instructions are STA (store accumulator), STX (store X), and STY (store Y), which write register contents to memory without affecting flags. Register transfer instructions such as TAX (A to X), TAY (A to Y), TXA (X to A), TYA (Y to A), TSX (SP to X), and TXS (X to SP) enable efficient data shuffling between registers and the stack pointer, preserving or clearing flags as appropriate. These instructions apply addressing modes such as immediate, zero page, absolute, and indexed variants to specify operands. Example opcodes include $A9 for LDA immediate, $A5 for LDA zero page, $BD for LDA absolute indexed by Y, $8D for STA absolute, and $AA for TAX (implied addressing).

Arithmetic Instructions

Arithmetic operations on the 6502 center on addition, subtraction, comparison, and increment/decrement, with support for both binary and binary-coded decimal (BCD) modes controlled by the decimal flag (D). The ADC (add with carry) instruction adds an operand and the carry flag to the accumulator, setting flags for carry, overflow, negative, and zero; in BCD mode, it performs decimal arithmetic. SBC (subtract with borrow) similarly subtracts an operand and the borrow (inverted carry) from the accumulator, with analogous flag updates and BCD support. Comparison instructions CMP (accumulator), CPX (X register), and CPY (Y register) subtract the operand from the register without altering it, updating the carry, negative, and zero flags to indicate relationships like greater than or equal. Increment and decrement operations include INC and DEC for memory locations (updating negative and zero flags), along with register-specific INX, DEX (for X), and INY, DEY (for Y), which do not affect the carry or overflow flags. Notably, the 6502 lacks dedicated multiply or divide instructions, requiring software implementations for such operations. Example opcodes are $69 for ADC immediate, $E9 for SBC immediate, $C9 for CMP immediate, $E8 for DEX (implied), and $EE for INC absolute.

Logical Instructions

Logical operations manipulate bits in the accumulator or memory, providing bitwise AND, exclusive-OR, inclusive-OR, bit testing, and shifts/rotates. AND (bitwise AND), EOR (exclusive OR), and ORA (inclusive OR) combine the accumulator with an operand, storing the result back in the accumulator and updating the negative and zero flags; these are essential for masking and toggling bits. The BIT instruction tests specified bits in a memory operand against the accumulator, setting the negative and overflow flags to the operand's bit 7 and 6 respectively, and the zero flag based on the AND result without modifying registers. Shift and rotate instructions include ASL (arithmetic shift left, equivalent to multiply by 2), LSR (logical shift right, divide by 2), ROL (rotate left through carry), and ROR (rotate right through carry), applicable to the accumulator (implied) or memory; they update the negative, zero, and carry flags accordingly. Example opcodes include $29 for AND immediate, $49 for EOR immediate, $09 for ORA immediate, $24 for BIT zero page, $0A for ASL accumulator, and $4A for LSR accumulator.

Branch Instructions

Branch instructions enable conditional control flow using relative addressing, offsetting the program counter (PC) by a signed 8-bit value (-128 to +127 bytes). These test specific processor flags: BEQ (branch if equal, zero flag set), BNE (branch if not equal, zero flag clear), BPL (branch if positive, negative flag clear), BMI (branch if minus, negative flag set), BCC (branch if carry clear), BCS (branch if carry set), BVC (branch if overflow clear), and BVS (branch if overflow set). An unconditional branch, JMP (jump), uses absolute or indirect addressing for longer displacements. These instructions do not affect flags but rely on prior operations to set them. Example opcodes are $F0 for BEQ relative, $D0 for BNE relative, $4C for JMP absolute, and $6C for JMP indirect.

Stack Instructions

The 6502's stack, a fixed 256-byte LIFO structure in page 1 ($0100$01FF), supports subroutine calls, interrupts, and register preservation via dedicated push and pull operations. PHA (push accumulator) and PHP (push processor status) store the accumulator or flags (with breaks flag always set) on the stack, decrementing the stack pointer (SP) by 1; PLA (pull accumulator) and PLP (pull processor status) reverse this, incrementing SP and loading values while updating flags (noting that PLP ignores the breaks flag bit). Subroutine instructions include JSR (jump to subroutine, pushing PC high byte then low), which saves the return address minus 1, and RTS (return from subroutine), which pulls the PC and adds 1. For interrupts and resets, RTI (return from interrupt) pulls the PC low byte, then status flags (ignoring breaks), then PC high byte. The 6502 lacks direct push/pull for X or Y in its base set, though later variants add them. Example opcodes are $48 for PHA (implied), $08 for PHP (implied), $68 for PLA (implied), $28 for PLP (implied), $20 for JSR absolute, $60 for RTS (implied), and $40 for RTI (implied).

Flag and Miscellaneous Instructions

Flag instructions provide direct control over individual status flags using implied addressing, each executing in 2 cycles without affecting other flags. They include: CLC (clear carry flag, $18), SEC (set carry flag, $38), CLD (clear decimal mode, $D8), SED (set decimal mode, $F8), CLI (clear interrupt disable, $58), SEI (set interrupt disable, $78), and CLV (clear overflow flag, $B8). These are crucial for configuring arithmetic modes, enabling/disabling interrupts, and managing carry/overflow in multi-byte operations.
BRK (break, $00) is an implied instruction that initiates a software interrupt: it pushes the processor status (with B flag set to 1) and the incremented program counter (PC+2) onto the stack, sets the interrupt disable flag (I=1), and transfers control to the interrupt vector at FFFEFFFEFFFEFFFF. It is used for debugging, error handling, or invoking operating system services.
NOP (no operation, $EA) is an implied instruction that performs no computational action, simply advancing the program counter by 1 byte and consuming 2 cycles. It is commonly used for precise timing delays or as a placeholder in code.
Instruction GroupNumber of InstructionsExample Opcodes (Hex)
Load/Store/Transfer12LDA imm: $A9, STA abs: $8D, TAX: $AA
Arithmetic/Compare/Inc-Dec11ADC imm: $69, SBC zp: $E5, CMP abs: $CD, DEX: $CA
Logical/Shift/Rotate8AND absX: $3D, BIT zp: $24, ASL acc: $0A, ROR abs: $6E
Branch/Jump9BEQ rel: $F0, BCC rel: $90, JMP abs: $4C
Stack/Subroutine/Interrupt7PHA: $48, JSR abs: $20, RTS: $60, RTI: $40
Flag and Miscellaneous9CLC: $18, SEC: $38, CLD: $D8, BRK: $00, NOP: $EA
This table summarizes the grouping and provides representative opcodes; full mappings reveal mode-specific variants within each class.

Assembly Language and Code Examples

Assembly language for the MOS Technology 6502 uses a mnemonic-based syntax to represent machine instructions, with common assemblers including ca65 from the cc65 suite and dasm. Ca65 accepts standard 6502 syntax, where a line may include a label followed by a colon, an optional directive like .org to set the origin address, and instructions such as LDA #$42 to load the immediate value 42 into the accumulator. Dasm supports macro capabilities and targets the 6502 among other 8-bit processors, using similar syntax for directives and opcodes.
A simple example demonstrates a loop that initializes the accumulator to 0 and adds 1 ten times, using the X register as a counter. The assembly code is:
.org $8000
 LDA #0 ; Load accumulator with 0
 LDX #10 ; Load X with loop count
loop:
 ADC #1 ; Add 1 to accumulator
 DEX ; Decrement X
 BNE loop ; Branch if not equal (X != 0)
Disassembly of the resulting machine code (starting at $8000) shows the opcodes: A9 00 (LDA #0), A2 0A (LDX #10), 69 01 (ADC #1), CA (DEX), D0 FB (BNE loop, relative branch of -5 bytes).
Subroutines are invoked using the JSR (Jump to Subroutine) instruction, which pushes the return address minus one onto the stack, and returned from with RTS (Return from Subroutine), which pulls the address, increments it, and loads it into the program counter. For instance, to call a subroutine that increments a zero-page variable:
 JSR increment_var
 ; Continue here after return
increment_var:
 INC $20 ; Increment location $20
 RTS
This pair enables modular code by saving and restoring execution flow via the stack.
Interrupt handling in 6502 assembly involves vectors at memory locations FFFEFFFE-FFFEFFFF, which hold the 16-bit address of the IRQ (Interrupt Request) or BRK (Break) handler routine, with the low byte at $FFFE and high byte at $FFFF. The handler typically saves registers, processes the interrupt, restores state, and ends with RTI (Return from Interrupt) to pull the program counter and status flags from the stack.
Best practices in 6502 assembly emphasize zero-page optimization for performance, as instructions accessing the first 256 bytes of memory (0000-00FF) execute faster and often in fewer cycles than absolute addressing. Programmers allocate frequently used variables and temporaries to zero page to reduce instruction sizes and cycle counts, such as using LDA $20 instead of LDA $8020, which saves bytes and time in loops or arithmetic operations.

Hardware Design

Integrated Circuit Architecture

The MOS Technology 6502 employs an 8-bit datapath design, featuring an arithmetic logic unit (ALU) capable of performing operations such as addition, subtraction, bitwise logic (AND, OR, XOR, NOT), and shifts on 8-bit data words. The ALU receives inputs from the accumulator and other sources via an internal 8-bit data bus, with results directed back to registers or the bus for storage or output. This structure supports efficient execution of the processor's instructions by minimizing data movement overhead within the chip.
The datapath interconnects the ALU with a limited set of on-chip registers, including the 8-bit accumulator (A), index registers X and Y, an 8-bit stack pointer (SP), a 16-bit program counter (PC), and an 8-bit status register (P), all linked through a shared internal data bus and separate address generation logic. Data flows between these elements and external memory via the chip's 8-bit bidirectional data bus (D0-D7) and 16-bit address bus (A0-A15), enabling zero-page addressing and stack operations without excessive external cycles. This bus-oriented architecture balances simplicity and performance, using dynamic latches clocked by internal phases to propagate signals across the datapath.
The control unit is a hardwired finite state machine (FSM) that orchestrates instruction execution through approximately 24 timing states, decoding opcodes fetched during the initial cycle and generating control signals to sequence ALU operations, register loads, and bus transfers over subsequent cycles. These states ensure precise synchronization, with the FSM advancing based on the instruction type and addressing mode, typically requiring 2 to 7 machine cycles per instruction. The design avoids microcode for reduced complexity, relying instead on a programmable logic array (PLA) to map opcode-state combinations to datapath controls.
Fabricated in NMOS technology, the 6502 integrates roughly 3,510 transistors on a die measuring 3.9 mm 4.3 mm, contributing to its compact footprint and low cost. Operating at clock speeds of 1-2 MHz, it consumes approximately 450 mW at 1 MHz, primarily due to dynamic logic and bus loading. The clock subsystem accepts a single-phase input signal, which is internally buffered and divided into two non-overlapping phases (phi1 and phi2) to drive latching and avoid race conditions; phi1 handles internal computations, while phi2 manages external bus access.

Process Technology Evolution

The MOS Technology 6502 was introduced in production in 1975 using a depletion-load NMOS fabrication process, which allowed for a single 5 V power supply and improved performance over earlier enhancement-mode NMOS designs like the Motorola 6800. This initial NMOS implementation, known as the "019" process developed at MOS Technology, featured approximately 3,510 transistors on a die measuring 3.9 mm 4.3 mm and operated at a standard clock speed of 1 MHz, enabling efficient 8-bit processing for early microcomputers.
Subsequent NMOS iterations of the 6502 by MOS Technology and Commodore Semiconductor Group increased clock speeds for better performance in consumer systems, with variants reaching up to 2 MHz in products like the Commodore 128 and Atari systems, while maintaining compatibility with the original design. These NMOS versions consumed around 450 mW at 1 MHz, providing higher speed but generating significant heat compared to later technologies, which often required robust cooling in densely packed systems.
The transition to CMOS began with the Western Design Center's (WDC) 65C02 in 1982, an enhanced drop-in replacement that retained pin compatibility while adopting a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor process for drastically reduced power consumptionapproximately 20 mW at 1 MHzmaking it ideal for battery-powered and embedded applications. This shift prioritized energy efficiency over raw speed in early CMOS variants, though subsequent WDC evolutions like the W65C02S achieved clock speeds up to 14 MHz in NMOS-equivalent performance while keeping power under 10 mW at lower frequencies, highlighting CMOS's advantages in scalability and thermal management.
As of 2025, WDC continues fabricating CMOS-based 6502 derivatives, such as the W65C02S, using modern processes down to 1.2 m or finer for embedded systems in automotive, industrial, and IoT devices, ensuring long-term availability with power efficiencies below 1 mW/MHz at reduced voltages.

Variants and Derivatives

Second-Source Manufacturers

To ensure a reliable supply chain for the MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor, MOS licensed its design to several second-source manufacturers who produced compatible clones. These licensees manufactured exact 8-bit replicas that maintained full software and hardware compatibility with the original, serving as drop-in replacements with only minor variations in operating speed and power requirements.
Rockwell International was an early second-source licensee, producing the R6500 series, which included the R6502 processor and supporting peripherals like the R6532 RAM/I/O/Timer. The R6500 family was employed in demanding environments, including military and aerospace applications, due to Rockwell's expertise in defense electronics and its emphasis on robust, cost-effective microcomputer systems. Rockwell's production helped lower overall 6502 costs and extended availability for industrial uses.
Synertek, another key licensee, developed the SY6500 series, encompassing the SY6502 microprocessor and compatible support chips, marketed as a totally software-compatible family for embedded and consumer systems. Synertek supplied these chips to major customers, including Atari for their 8-bit computers and gaming consoles, contributing to the widespread adoption in personal computing. The SY6500 line emphasized high-volume production and integration into development kits like the SYM-1 single-board computer.
Additional licensees included California Micro Devices (under GTE Microcircuits) and various international firms, though Japanese production was less prevalent and typically limited to specific regional markets. Most second-source manufacturing ended by the early 1990s as demand shifted to CMOS derivatives, but limited legacy production persisted for embedded and replacement applications into the late 1990s.

MOS 6507

The MOS 6507 was a lower-cost variant of the 6502 developed by MOS Technology, featuring a reduced 13-bit address bus (A0A12) that limited addressable memory to 8 KB instead of the standard 64 KB. This reduction lowered the pin count to 28 pins from the original 40-pin package, reducing manufacturing costs and making it suitable for cost-sensitive consumer products. The 6507 retained the full 6502 instruction set, including support for binary-coded decimal (BCD) mode, ensuring complete software compatibility. It was primarily used in the Atari 2600 (originally Atari Video Computer System) video game console released in 1977, where it operated at approximately 1.19 MHz and supported the console's minimal memory configuration of up to 4 KB ROM and 128 bytes of RAM within its constrained address space.

Enhanced and Extended Versions

The MOS 6510, introduced in 1982 for the Commodore 64, is a derivative of the 6502 featuring an integrated 8-bit bidirectional I/O port and tri-state address lines to enable dynamic memory banking between RAM and ROM. This design allowed the Commodore 64 to use a single 64 KB memory space more efficiently without additional hardware for address decoding. The MOS 8500, released in 1985 as an HMOS-II process variant of the 6510, maintained full compatibility while reducing power consumption and heat generation compared to the original NMOS implementation, and it became standard in later Commodore 64 revisions.
Western Design Center's (WDC) 65C02, launched in 1983 as a CMOS redesign, addressed power efficiency issues of the NMOS 6502 by operating at lower voltages and including enhancements such as the STP instruction to halt the clock for power saving and the WAI instruction to pause execution until an interrupt. It expanded the instruction set with bit manipulation operations like TSB (test and set bits), TRB (test and reset bits), and enhanced BIT for testing specific bits in memory, alongside relative branches on bit states (BBR and BBS) for more efficient conditional code. These additions improved code density and performance in embedded systems without altering the core 8-bit architecture.
For 16-bit capabilities, WDC introduced the 65816 in 1985, extending the 6502 lineage with 16-bit accumulator, index registers (X and Y), and a 24-bit address bus supporting up to 16 MB of memory, while retaining backward compatibility through an emulation mode that mimics the original 6502 behavior. A software-controlled flag switches between 8-bit and 16-bit modes, enabling hybrid applications that leverage extended registers for faster arithmetic and larger addressing. This processor powered the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) via Ricoh's 5A22 variant, which integrated additional features like DMA controllers for sprite handling.
Ricoh's 2A03, developed in 1982 for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), incorporated a 6502-compatible core but omitted binary-coded decimal (BCD) mode by disconnecting relevant circuitry on the die, a modification that avoided patent issues while integrating an Audio Processing Unit (APU) with five sound channels: two pulse waves, a triangle wave, noise, and DPCM for sampled audio. It also embedded memory-mapped registers for joypad input and sprite DMA, streamlining NES hardware design into a single 40-pin chip running at 1.79 MHz.
Hudson Soft's HuC6280, released in 1988 for the PC Engine (TurboGrafx-16), built on the 65C02 with an integrated Memory Management Unit (MMU) using eight mapping registers to expand the address space to 2 MB, far exceeding the 6502's 64 KB limit. Additional features included a 7-bit interval timer for precise timing and three programmable timers for interrupt-driven tasks, with the CPU capable of switching between 1.79 MHz and 7.16 MHz speeds to balance performance and power. These enhancements supported the console's advanced graphics and multitasking requirements.
In 2025, 6502 derivatives continue in embedded and retro applications, with WDC producing low-power 65C02 and 65816 variants for IoT devices due to their static CMOS design and minimal instruction overhead. Modern projects like the 65uino single-board computer integrate the 65C02 with USB and peripherals for educational retro programming, while the Neo6502 pairs it with an RP2040 coprocessor for hybrid embedded systems handling USB and memory emulation. Tools such as llvm-mos enable contemporary C/C++ development on these cores, sustaining their use in niche low-power IoT sensors and vintage hardware revivals.

Quirks and Limitations

Notable Bugs

The original MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor, particularly its NMOS implementations, exhibited several hardware bugs and quirks that affected instruction execution and flag status updates. These issues were present in early silicon masks produced primarily before the 1980s and were later mitigated in CMOS derivatives like the WDC 65C02.
One prominent bug involves the indirect jump instruction (JMP (indirect)), where the effective address vector straddles a 256-byte page boundaryspecifically, when the low byte of the vector address is FF.Insuchcases,theprocessorfetchesthehighbyteofthetargetaddressfromthesamepage(e.g.,forJMP(FF. In such cases, the processor fetches the high byte of the target address from the same page (e.g., for JMP (FF.Insuchcases,theprocessorfetchesthehighbyteofthetargetaddressfromthesamepage(e.g.,forJMP(xxFF), the high byte comes from $xx00 instead of $(xx+1)00), leading to an incorrect jump destination. This occurs because the 6502's address increment logic fails to carry over the page boundary during the fetch of the high byte. For example, JMP ($00FF) fetches the low byte from $00FF and the high byte from $0000 (due to the bug) instead of $0100, potentially causing jumps to unintended locations. This bug is characteristic of NMOS revisions and requires workarounds such as aligning vectors away from page boundaries.
In decimal mode (enabled by the SED instruction), the ADC (add with carry) and SBC (subtract with borrow) instructions perform binary arithmetic internally before adjusting the result to binary-coded decimal (BCD), but the status flags are updated based on the pre-adjustment binary values rather than the final BCD result. Consequently, the negative (N), zero (Z), and overflow (V) flags do not accurately reflect BCD overflow or underflow conditions; for instance, the V flag is set only if there is a signed overflow in the binary operation, ignoring whether the BCD digits exceed 9 in any position (e.g., adding 0x59 + 0x01 in decimal mode yields 0x60 with V clear, despite no BCD overflow, but binary overflow scenarios can set V erroneously for BCD). Reproduction involves setting the D flag, performing ADC or SBC on BCD values that cause digit carries, and observing mismatched flags; this quirk affects arithmetic validation in BCD-dependent code and was not corrected until CMOS versions.
Certain undocumented opcodes, resulting from unused combinations in the 6502's opcode decode matrix, trigger a "JAM" or "kill" (KIL) condition that halts the processor indefinitely. These include opcodes such as $02, $12, $22, $32, $42, $52, $62, $72, $92, $B2, $D2, and $F2, which attempt invalid addressing modes and trap the CPU in an infinite fetch cycle (T1 state) with $FF on the data bus, ignoring interrupts until reset. Although the standard BRK opcode ($00) is a documented software interrupt that does not halt, some illegal opcodes mimic partial BRK sequences but fail to complete, leading to the JAM state; execution can be reproduced by assembling and running one of these opcodes directly. These behaviors stem from incomplete microcode in the NMOS design and are treated as NOPs in later CMOS variants.
These bugs primarily affected early NMOS silicon revisions, such as Revision A (pre-1976 masks lacking full ROR support) and subsequent NMOS variants used in 1970s systems like the KIM-1 and Apple II, with production masks before the 1980s transition to CMOS processes. Later revisions and second-source CMOS implementations resolved most issues, though NMOS compatibility requires emulating these quirks. Workarounds, such as avoiding boundary-aligned vectors or inserting flag-correcting instructions like EOR #$00 after decimal operations, were commonly employed in period software.

Design Trade-offs and Workarounds

The MOS Technology 6502's design prioritized cost reduction and simplicity, omitting dedicated multiply and divide instructions to minimize transistor count and die size, which allowed the chip to be priced at $25 upon releasefar below competitors like the Intel 8080. This trade-off enabled widespread adoption in early personal computers but necessitated software implementations for multiplication and division, such as table lookups or bit-shifting loops, which could consume dozens of cycles and additional bytes per operation compared to hardware support in later processors. While this increased computational overhead for numerical tasks, it aligned with the 6502's target market of resource-constrained systems where such operations were infrequent or could be optimized via precomputation.
The 6502's stack, limited to 256 bytes on a fixed page ($0100$01FF), simplified the hardware by using an 8-bit stack pointer without needing a separate page register, reducing complexity and power consumption. This constraint curtails deep recursion or extensive subroutine nesting, potentially leading to stack overflows in complex programs, though it proved adequate for most 1970s-era applications like game loops or simple OS kernels that favored iterative designs over recursive ones. Programmers mitigated this by employing software-managed stacks in main memory or restricting call depth, techniques that added minimal overhead in flat address spaces but required careful management to avoid fragmentation.
Interrupt handling introduced further trade-offs, with the non-maskable interrupt (NMI) using edge-triggered detection to ensure responsiveness in critical scenarios like power failure detection, but this created potential race conditions if an edge occurred during the processor's fetch cycle, risking missed interrupts without external latching hardware. Maskable IRQs, being level-sensitive, avoided some of these issues but still required precise timing to prevent nested interrupts from corrupting state. To address these, designers often incorporated external edge detectors or software polling as safeguards, balancing reliability against added circuitry cost.
A notable workaround arose from the indirect jump (JMP (addr)) instruction's behavior, where vectors spanning a page boundary fetched the high byte from the wrong page due to a hardware oversight in address incrementation, potentially causing jumps to invalid locations. Programmers circumvented this by aligning vectors within the same page or substituting absolute jumps, a practice that avoided the bug without performance penalty in most cases but increased code size slightly for affected routines.
Decimal mode, enabled via the SED instruction for BCD arithmetic, suffered from inconsistent flag behavior on the original NMOS 6502, where the negative (N), overflow (V), and zero (Z) flags did not reliably reflect the decimal result after ADC or SBC operations, complicating conditional branching in financial or display code. A common workaround involved appending an EOR #$00 (or equivalent) immediately after the arithmetic instruction to normalize N and Z flags based on the accumulator's binary value, adding one byte and three cycles per operation but ensuring correct branching without altering the result. The carry (C) flag remained valid for decimal comparisons, allowing its use in loops or validations.
These design choices and their mitigations collectively imposed a performance toll through additional instructions and careful coding practices in affected software. Later variants, such as the Western Design Center 65C02, addressed several issues by fixing the indirect JMP bugproperly incrementing the page for high-byte fetchesand improving decimal mode handling, such as clearing the D flag during BRK/IRQ entry to prevent carryover into handlers, while adding opcodes like bit test instructions to reduce software overhead. These enhancements made the 65C02 more suitable for modern embedded uses without altering the core architecture's efficiency.

References

The MOS 6502: How a $25 Chip Sparked a Computer Revolution

Development of the MOS Technology 6502: A Historical Perspective

An Introduction to the MOS 6502

MOS Technology 6502 - Retro Computing

The Rise of MOS Technology & The 6502 - Commodore Computers

Digging into Technology's Past - Archaeology Magazine Archive

Chip Hall of Fame: MOS Technology 6502 Microprocessor

MOS Technology 6502 - C64-Wiki

241 An Interview With Chuck Peddle Charismatic Chipmaking ...

Honoring Chuck Peddle; Father Of The 6502 And The Chips That ...

The Legendary Chuck Peddle, Inventor of The Personal Computer

The Holdt Archives - Team 6502

 Motorola.M6800.Microprocessor.Applications.Manual.1975.pdf

Leaving Arizona - by Babbage - The Chip Letter - Substack

Chuck Peddle Dies at 82; His $25 Chip Helped Start the PC Age

Bill Mensch - Team 6502

 Oral History Panel on the Development and Promotion of the ...

Chuck Peddle - Engineering and Technology History Wiki

1975 | Timeline of Computer History

6501 - Retro Computing

Were any Apple 1s sold with non-ROR 6502s?

MOS 6501 - Apple Wiki | Fandom

The 6502 CPU's odd debut - The Silicon Underground

Irving Gould - The Money Man - Commodore Computers

Timeline Overview - Commodore History - Zimmers.net

Best-selling desktop computer | Guinness World Records

Second generation of video games | Video Game Sales Wiki - Fandom

How Many? - BBC Microcomputer

IR Information : Sales Data - Dedicated Video Game Sales Units

Microsoft Releases Historic 6502 BASIC is now Open Source

Olimex NEO6502 is a W65C02 and Raspberry Pi RP2040-powered ...

Registers - 6502.org

6502 8bitworkshop documentation

6502 Instruction Set - Retro Game Coders

Programming the NES: The 6502 in detail - Middle Engine Software

Status flags - NESdev Wiki

 6502.pdf

6502 Instruction Set - mass:werk

Tutorials and Aids - 6502.org

MOS-6502 Instruction Set

6502 / 6510 Instruction Set | C64 OS

ca65 Users Guide - CC65

dasm - macro assembler for 8-bit machines

6502.org Tutorials: Investigating Interrupts

CPU interrupts - NESdev Wiki

6502 assembly optimisations - NESdev Wiki

Visual6502wiki/6502 datapath - NESdev Wiki

Reverse Engineering the MOS 6502 CPU - media.ccc.de

Visual6502wiki/6502 Timing States - NESdev Wiki

MOnSter 6502

 Master Degree Thesis Digital-Based Amplifier on Flexible Substrate

Chip Hall of Fame: MOS Technology 6502 Microprocessor

MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor family - CPU-World

MOS Technology 6502 CPU - Low End Mac

Flexible 6502 Takes Us Back to the Future - EE Times

Western Design Center | 6502, 65816 Microprocessors, IC, IP and ...

https://www.mouser.com/ProductDetail/Western-Design-Center-WDC/W65C02S6TPG-14

CPU 6510 / 8500

cpu-collection.de >> by Manufacturer >> MOS >> 850x

 W65C02S 8bit Microprocessor - Western Design Center

6502.org Tutorials: 65C02 Opcodes

W65C816S 16-bit Microprocessor - Western Design Center

 W65C816S 8/16bit Microprocessor - 6502.org

65c816 for 6502 developers - SNESdev Wiki

2A03 - NESdev Wiki

Happy Birthday 6502 | Hackaday

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ejbTKtgSZI0

Were there 6502 revisions B and C, and what were they like?

Jump table - NESdev Wiki

6502.org View topic - JMP(nn) - indirect JMP question

6502.org Tutorials: The Overflow (V) Flag Explained

Flags on decimal mode on the NMOS 6502 - AtariAge Forums

<Now Go Bang!> 6502 Illegal Opcodes Demystified - mass:werk

CPU unofficial opcodes - NESdev Wiki

Why didn't early single-chip CPUs support multiplication instructions

Did anyone ever run out of stack space on the 6502?

6502 Family CPU Reference - pagetable.com

6502.org Tutorials: Decimal Mode

MOS 6507 Microprocessor

MOS Technology 6507
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion