Nastaliq Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 13 days ago 
Nastaliq
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Nastaliq (also spelled Nastalq) is a cursive variant of the Arabic script, renowned for its elegant, fluid, and rhythmic form, primarily used in writing Persian, Urdu, and Ottoman Turkish. Developed in 14th-century Iran as a blend of the naskh and talq scripts, it features short vertical strokes, oblique baselines, and sinuous diagonal lines that create a distinctive downward-sloping rhythm ideal for poetic expression.
Originating around 1350 CE in Iranpossibly in TabrizNastaliq was initially known as naskh-i talq before being shortened to its current name, and it is traditionally attributed to the calligrapher Mir Ali Tabrizi (active ca. 13701410). By the early 15th century, it had spread widely across the Persianate world, from the Ottoman Empire in the west to India in the east, becoming the preferred script for transcribing Persian literature, poetry, and religious texts. Its development flourished under the Timurid and Safavid dynasties, evolving from a practical writing tool into a highly refined art form that emphasized aesthetic harmony and emotional depth.
In Persian culture, Nastaliq holds a central place as one of the most expressive mediums of artistic refinement, often adorning manuscripts, architecture, and albums that blend calligraphy with illumination. It was adapted for Urdu during the Mughal era in India, where it became the standard script for the language, incorporating additional characters for Indo-Aryan phonemes while retaining its cursive elegance, and it remains the preferred script for Urdu to the present day. In the Ottoman context, Nastaliq was employed for literary and poetic works in Turkish, though less commonly for Arabic texts, and it influenced imperial printing and manuscript traditions. Notable masters, such as Sultan Ali Mashhadi (d. 1520), Mir Ali Haravi (d. ca. 1550), and Mir Imad al-Hasani (d. 1615), elevated the script through innovations in proportion, rhythm, and subtlety, establishing canonical styles like khafi (small) and jali (large).

Origins and Development

Historical Emergence

The Nastaliq script emerged in 14th-century Iran as a distinctive calligraphic style, initially known as naskh-i talq, blending the angular clarity of the Naskh script with the flowing, cursive elegance of the Talq script to create a more fluid and aesthetically refined form suitable for Persian literary works. This transition addressed the limitations of earlier scripts in expressing the rhythmic and poetic qualities of Persian language, prioritizing visual harmony and readability in manuscript production.
While traditionally associated with Tabriz, some scholars suggest its initial development occurred among scribes in Shiraz. The script's development and codification is widely attributed to the calligrapher Mir Ali Tabrizi, active around 13701410 CE in Tabriz under the Jalayrid sultanate, a successor state to the Ilkhanid dynasty, where he codified its proportions and rules, drawing on local scribal traditions in Shiraz and Tabriz. During the Ilkhanid period (12561335 CE), precursors to Nastaliq appeared in administrative and literary contexts, reflecting a broader cultural synthesis in post-Mongol Iran that fostered artistic innovation amid political fragmentation. This era's patronage of Persian scholarship laid the groundwork for Nastaliq's rise, as scribes sought a script that better captured the nuances of classical Persian poetry and prose.
Nastaliq gained prominence during the Timurid period (13701507 CE), particularly in Herat and Shiraz, where Timurid rulers like Baysonqor Mirza established royal libraries and ateliers that promoted its use in copying literary masterpieces, linking the script directly to the Persian literary revival. Early manuscripts from this time, such as those produced by calligraphers like Sultan Ali Mashhadi (d. 1520), demonstrate initial refinements in proportion and rhythm, with examples including poetic collections and historical texts inscribed in gold-ruled pages that highlight Nastaliq's suitability for ornate illumination. By the early 15th century, the script had spread across the Persianate world, from Baghdad to Bukhara, solidifying its role in elevating Persian cultural expression.

Key Influences and Evolution

Nastaliq script saw widespread adoption and standardization across the Ottoman, Safavid, and Mughal empires from the 15th to 19th centuries, becoming the preferred style for Persian literary and administrative texts in these realms. In the Ottoman Empire, it was primarily reserved for transcribing Persian poetry in imperial manuscripts, complementing the more utilitarian Naskh for official documents, and was highly valued in royal libraries from Istanbul. The Safavids in Iran elevated it to a courtly standard, with calligraphers like Sultan Ali Mashhadi establishing refined proportions during the early 16th century. Meanwhile, the Mughals in India integrated Nastaliq into their artistic traditions, using it extensively for divans and historical chronicles, as seen in the script's prominence in bureaucratic records and illuminated works under emperors like Akbar and Shah Jahan.
Royal patronage played a pivotal role in Nastaliq's evolution, particularly under Shah Abbas I (r. 15881629) in Safavid Iran, where it reached a peak of elegance in the 16th and 17th centuries through state-sponsored workshops in Isfahan. The shah supported master calligraphers such as Mir Imad al-Hasani, whose fluid, rhythmic style influenced generations and was compiled into prestigious albums like the Gulshan Album, blending calligraphy with painting. This patronage not only standardized Nastaliq's proportionsemphasizing diagonal ascenders and harmonious word spacingbut also elevated it as a symbol of imperial sophistication, fostering technical innovations in ink preparation and paper quality to enhance its visual flow.
The script's development was deeply intertwined with the demands of Persian literature, particularly the ghazals and masnavis of poets like Hafez (d. 1390) and Rumi (d. 1273), whose works required a cursive form that captured poetic rhythm and emotional depth. Illuminated manuscripts of Hafez's Divan, such as a 16th-century Safavid copy with gold-illuminated borders and full-page miniatures, exemplify Nastaliq's adaptability, where verses are arranged in elegant panels to evoke the poem's mystical themes. Similarly, 15th-century copies of Rumi's Masnavi in Nastaliq feature narrative illustrations alongside homilies, with the script's slanting baseline facilitating the flow of lengthy couplets in complete six-volume sets. These examples highlight how Nastaliq evolved from a 14th-century innovation into an artistic medium that visually amplified literary expression across centuries.
By the 19th century, Nastaliq's practical handwritten use declined with the advent of print technology, as mechanical typesetting struggled with its cursive, non-linear forms, leading to a shift toward lithography that mimicked handwriting but reduced demand for scribes. In Persia, private lithographic presses from the 1830s onward produced affordable books in Nastaliq, sustaining its role in popular literature, yet the script's artisanal production waned in favor of mass reproduction. Despite this, Nastaliq persisted in artistic contexts, such as calligraphic panels and luxury albums, maintaining its cultural prestige in Ottoman, Safavid successor states, and Mughal-influenced regions.

Script Characteristics

Letter Forms and Proportions

Nastaliq script adapts the 32 letters of the Persian alphabet, which extends the 28 basic Arabic letters with four additional characters (pe, che, zhe, and gaf) to accommodate Persian phonetics, resulting in a highly cursive system where letters connect fluidly in ligatures along a diagonal baseline slanting from top-right to bottom-left at approximately 45 degrees. This cursive nature emphasizes interconnected forms rather than isolated characters, with the baseline serving as an imaginary diagonal line that allows letters to "hang" or stack, creating a sense of dynamic flow and vertical layering in words.
Proportional rules in Nastaliq derive from the use of a rhombic-tipped qalam, a reed pen cut obliquely to form a diamond-shaped nib that produces strokes at a 45-degree angle relative to the writing surface, yielding elongated horizontal strokes and compact, stacked vertical elements. The fundamental unit of proportion is the noqta (rhombic dot), formed by pressing the pen tip onto the paper; for instance, the height of the alif () equals three noqta, as does the diameter of the nun () circle, ensuring harmonious scaling across letters while allowing for stylistic elongation in horizontals to enhance the script's sweeping rhythm. This system balances the qalam's thick downstrokes and thin upstrokes, with verticals often shortened and stacked to fit the diagonal orientation, contrasting with the more horizontal emphasis in scripts like Naskh.
Each of the 32 letters exhibits variations across four positional formsinitial, medial, final, and isolatedaltered by context and neighboring letters to maintain cursive continuity, often resulting in dozens of unique glyphs per letter; for example, the yeh () features flowing, extended tails in medial and final positions to link smoothly, while the noon () displays looped, ascending forms that stack above or below the baseline for rhythmic balance. These variations prioritize diagonal momentum, with initial forms typically ascending sharply and final forms descending in hooks, adapting the skeletal structure of Arabic letters to Nastaliq's tilted, interconnected aesthetic.
In their skeletal (raw) state, Nastaliq letters consist of basic outlines derived from the qalam's strokes, lacking diacritics, which are then fleshed out with dots and vowel marks placed strategically to distinguish forms without disrupting the cursive flowsuch as the two dots above the yeh or the single dot under the b (), positioned along the diagonal to align with the baseline's slant. This addition of diacritics completes the letters' readability while preserving proportional harmony, as vowel marks like fatha () or kasra () are scaled to one noqta and offset to avoid overlapping the stacked elements.

Calligraphic Principles

Nastaliq calligraphy is defined by its emphasis on fluidity, achieved primarily through the extensive use of ligatures that connect letters in a seamless, curving flow, creating a dynamic visual harmony rather than rigid isolation. This interconnectedness avoids straight lines, favoring sinuous strokes and short verticals that produce a distinctive "hanging" effect, where letters slope gently below the baseline, evoking a sense of graceful descent. Rhythmic spacing further enhances this, with balanced horizontal elongations and proportional gaps that mimic natural movement, ensuring the script's overall composition feels alive and undulating.
In classical manuscripts, page layout adheres to specific norms that amplify Nastaliq's aesthetic, with text often arranged in diagonal lines to accentuate the script's inherent slant and flow, typically featuring two verses per sheet in formats like qit'as. Interlinear spacing is carefully modulated to maintain readability while preserving the rhythmic cadence, and marginal decorationssuch as illuminated borders or supplementary notes in khafi scriptframe the central composition, adding layers of ornamental depth without disrupting the primary text's harmony. These arrangements, common in Persian poetic collections, prioritize visual balance and the script's cursive elegance.
Essential tools and techniques for Nastaliq are tailored to support its fluid execution, beginning with the qalam reed pen, crafted from swamp-grown reeds seasoned by burial in horse manure for up to four years to harden and darken the material. The pen is then cut obliquely with a penknife on a makta board, shaped at an angle for optimal stroke variation, and slit centrally to hold precisely one letter's worth of ink, allowing for the precise control needed in curving forms. Ink, typically black and water-soluble, is prepared from soot mixed with gum arabic and water, sometimes enhanced with alum or gallnut for durability, and stored with silk fibers in an inkwell to regulate flow. Paper is specifically sized for Nastaliq by dyeing it in subtle tones like cream or tan, coating it with a starch-based ahar mixture, and burnishing it smooth to reduce absorbency, ensuring clean lines and vibrant contrasts in manuscripts.
The script's rhythmic principles are deeply influenced by the metrics of Persian poetry, with its undulating spacing and stroke variations designed to visually synchronize with the metered lines of verse, such as those in ghazals by Hafiz, creating a symbiotic flow where the calligraphy enhances the poem's auditory and emotional cadence. This alignment, rooted in Nastaliq's development for transcribing classical literature, ensures that the visual rhythm mirrors the quantitative patterns of poetic feet, fostering an integrated artistic expression.

Variants and Styles

Shekasteh Nastaliq

Shekasteh Nastaliq, often translated as "broken Nastaliq," emerged as an expressive and informal variant of the standard Nastaliq script during the late 17th and early 18th centuries in Iran, at the tail end of the Safavid period (15021736). This style developed primarily as a shorthand derivative for rapid handwriting, evolving from practical needs into a refined artistic form that prioritized aesthetic fluidity over strict legibility. Key innovators included calligraphers such as Inayatullah Munshi, Morteza Quli Khan Shamlou (d. 1689/1100 AH), and Mohammad Shafi Husseini (d. 1670), who laid the groundwork for its distinctive techniques, with further perfection achieved by Dervish Abd al-Majid Taleghani (17371772) in Isfahan during the 1170s AH. Following the Safavid collapse in 1722, the style experienced a temporary decline but was revitalized during the Qajar era (17891925), particularly under rulers like Fath Ali Shah (r. 17971834) and Nasir al-Din Shah (r. 18481896), becoming a favored medium for personal and decorative expression.
The hallmark features of Shekasteh Nastaliq involve intentional distortions of traditional letter forms, including the breaking of conventional connections between letters to create a sense of fluidity and movement, alongside elongated and twisted shapes that add artistic flair. This highly cursive script often employs unauthorized ligatures, omits diacritical dots and vowel marks, and features complex, fragmented compositions executed in a single pen stroke, resulting in a dynamic yet challenging-to-read appearance that emphasizes visual rhythm over textual clarity. These elements allow for intricate, dense layouts with short vertical strokes and diagonal letter orientations, enabling calligraphers to convey emotion through graceful, rising and falling word forms. Unlike more formal scripts, Shekasteh Nastaliq's distortionssuch as uniform yet distinct letter proportions and innovative compositions like ghubar-e sadiq (pure dust script)prioritize speed and elegance, making it unsuitable for sacred texts like the Qur'an but ideal for secular creativity.
Historically, Shekasteh Nastaliq found its primary applications in informal contexts, such as personal correspondence, private notes, albums (muraqqa), and decorative arts, where its expressive qualities could enhance poetic or administrative content without the constraints of standard printing. It was employed for divans (collections of poetry), poem panels, and business documents, allowing writers to infuse text with personal emotion through stylized flourishes. In the Qajar period, notable examples include the poetry panels and manuscripts by masters like Syed Gulestaneh and Yadullah Kaboli Khansari, as well as the inscriptions by Mirza Gholam Reza Isfahani (d. 1887) in the Sepahsalar Masjid in Tehran, and works by Mirza Qualm Reza Isfahani (18301886) and Sayed Ali Akbar Golestaneh (18571901), which highlight the style's role in blending literary depth with visual artistry to evoke sentiment rather than prioritize readability. These Qajar-era pieces, often in notebook-style formats, demonstrate how Shekasteh Nastaliq served as a niche tool for conveying nuanced emotional expression in elite cultural circles.

Regional Adaptations

In South Asia, Nastaliq adapted to Urdu during the Mughal Empire (15261857 CE), incorporating additional letters to represent Indic phonetic elements absent in Persian, such as retroflex sounds like //, //, and //, which were formed by modifying existing Perso-Arabic forms with dots or curls. This evolution allowed the script to accommodate the synthesis of Indo-Aryan dialects with Persian and Arabic influences, making it suitable for emerging Urdu literature and administration. Mughal-era documents, including poetry by Mirza Ghalib (17971869) and Mir Taqi Mir (17231810), showcase this adapted Nastaliq in courtly and poetic contexts, while British colonial printing presses from the early 19th century further standardized it for educational and governance texts, though handwritten forms persisted.
Ottoman Turkish employed Nastaliq primarily for poetry and Persian-influenced literature, rather than as a primary administrative tool. Reserved for decorative purposes in manuscripts, such as transcribing divans of Persian poets, it contrasted with the more upright naskh used for official Arabic texts, reflecting Ottoman preferences for form over the sweeping elegance seen in Iranian applications. This usage continued until the 1928 script reform under Mustafa Kemal Atatrk, which replaced the Perso-Arabic system, including Nastaliq, with a Latin-based alphabet to modernize literacy and align with Western influences.
Today, Nastaliq survives prominently in Pakistan and India, where it remains essential for Urdu religious texts, such as tafsirs (Quranic commentaries) and devotional literature tied to Muslim cultural identity, as well as public signage and journalism. In Pakistan, newspapers like Jang and Nawa-i-Waqt rely on digital fonts such as Jameel Noori Nastaliq and Sheeraz for daily publication, preserving calligraphic fidelity amid typesetting advancements since the 1980s. In India, platforms like Rekhta digitize thousands of Urdu works, including poetry and religious content, while signage in regions like Uttar Pradesh and Hyderabad continues to feature Nastaliq for its cultural resonance, supporting ongoing efforts to integrate it into modern digital environments.

Modern Applications

Typesetting Challenges

In the 19th century, the cursive and fluid nature of Nastaliq script posed significant challenges for mechanical reproduction using metal type, leading publishers to favor lithography as a workaround. The script's high number of ligatures, variable letter shapes, and intricate connections made it inefficient for casting individual sorts, resulting in cramped and less legible prints compared to handwritten manuscripts. Lithography allowed scribes to handwrite text directly onto lithographic stones, preserving the aesthetic qualities of traditional calligraphy while enabling mass production; this method was introduced in Iran around 1821 and used for the first Nastaliq-printed book in 1843.
Early 20th-century attempts to develop Nastaliq metal type for mechanical composition largely failed due to the script's complexity, particularly when using fixed-width fonts that disrupted natural flow. Efforts like the Osmania Type Foundry in Hyderabad (established 1921) produced fonts with over 1,000 sorts, but these required manual adjustments for spacing and often resulted in irregular gaps and illegible distortions. Simplified linear adaptations, such as the 1965 Linotype Nastaliq (Tamannai script), further compromised readability by eliminating proper kerning and cursive connections, leading to reader rejection in publications like the Daily Jang newspaper.
Prior to the 2000s, software limitations exacerbated these issues, necessitating extensive manual kerning and contextual shaping to approximate Nastaliq's dynamic forms. Programs like early versions of Adobe InDesign required users to manually adjust letter spacing and forms based on adjacent characters, as automated rendering often failed to handle the script's overlapping and variable proportions, leading to aesthetic inconsistencies. Word processors and early desktop publishing tools similarly demanded context-sensitive adjustments, delaying production and compromising the script's elegance.
In Iranian publishing, the transition from handwriting to digital methods in the 1990s highlighted persistent quality gaps, as offset and dot-matrix printing struggled to replicate Nastaliq's fluidity despite growing investments in computer technology. Publishers shifted from calligraphic composition to software like Chalipa (introduced 1997), but outputs often exhibited unnatural joins and spacing, falling short of lithographic standards and requiring hybrid manual interventions. These challenges slowed the adoption of fully digital workflows, with legibility issues remaining a barrier until later advancements.

Digital Fonts and Tools

InPage, developed by Concept Software Pvt. Ltd., emerged in 1994 as a pioneering page layout tool tailored for Urdu and Persian publishing, featuring built-in support for Nastaliq fonts with automatic kerning to mimic traditional calligraphic flow. Widely adopted in Pakistan's newspaper industry, it enables complex typesetting for languages like Arabic, Sindhi, and Pashto, processing Nastaliq as character-based glyphs rather than relying on standard OpenType features.
Cross-platform advancements include Google's Noto Nastaliq Urdu, released in an early version in 2014 as part of the Noto font family to support Unicode scripts globally. It is a variable font supporting weights 400 (Regular), 500 (Medium), 600 (SemiBold), and 700 (Bold) along with the 'arabic' subset, providing a cursive, serif-style Nastaliq suitable for digital Urdu text rendering across devices. In modern web development, it can be integrated into Next.js applications using the next/font/google module for optimized loading, for example:
import { Noto_Nastaliq_Urdu } from 'next/font/google';

const notoNastaliqUrdu = Noto_Nastaliq_Urdu({
 subsets: ,
 // weight: , // optional if using variable axes
});
It can then be applied to elements via className={notoNastaliqUrdu.className}.
For Persian applications, IranNastaliq, designed by Hossein Zahedi in 2013 and sponsored by Iran's Supreme Council of Information and Communications Technology, offers OpenType-compatible Nastaliq glyphs under an open license since 2022, facilitating broader web and print use in Farsi contexts.
Post-2020 developments have enhanced Nastaliq integration through tools like Adobe InDesign's World-Ready Paragraph Composer, which supports Urdu and Persian scripts via fonts such as Noto Nastaliq Urdu, enabling right-to-left layout and contextual glyph substitution for professional design workflows. Open-source projects, including XeLaTeX, have improved rendering of complex Nastaliq fonts like Awami Nastaliq through Graphite shaping engine integration, allowing precise handling in document preparation since TeXLive 2017 updates, with maintenance releases continuing into the 2020s.
In 2023, Google Fonts released Gulzar, a new variable Nastaliq Urdu typeface designed to expand options for digital Urdu content, supporting weights from thin to black for versatile applications in web and print. Awami Nastaliq received updates in 2023 (v3.200), 2024 (v3.300), and October 2025 (v3.400), enhancing support for Southwest Asian languages. These tools find practical application in web design for Persian-language sites, where IranNastaliq ensures cultural authenticity in responsive layouts, and in Pakistani mobile apps like InPage Mobile, which supports Nastaliq editing with variable weights for dynamic content scaling on iOS and Android devices.

Digital Standardization

Unicode Implementation

Nastaliq, as a variant of the Arabic script, is encoded using the characters in the Unicode Arabic block (U+0600U+06FF), which was introduced in Unicode 1.0 in 1991 to support the basic letters, diacritics, and punctuation of Arabic-script languages. This block provides the foundational encoding for Nastaliq's letterforms, allowing consistent representation across digital systems without a separate block dedicated to the style itself, since Nastaliq is a calligraphic rendering rather than a distinct script. Essential Persian characters such as peh (U+067E) and keheh (U+06A9) were included in the core Arabic block since Unicode 1.0, with further extensions in subsequent versions.
Extensions in subsequent Unicode versions incorporated additional blocks such as Arabic Supplement (U+0750U+077F), added in Unicode 4.1 in 2005, to accommodate specific characters for Persian and Urdu, including letters like U+0686 ARABIC LETTER PEH and U+06A9 ARABIC LETTER KEHEH, which are essential for Nastaliq orthographies in those languages. Arabic Extended-A (U+08A0U+08FF), added in Unicode 6.1 in 2012, provides further letters for African and other languages. These additions ensure fuller support for regional adaptations while maintaining compatibility with the core Arabic block. Proposals for these extensions were contributed by standards bodies, including Pakistan's language authorities in proposals such as UTC L2/06-039 for Urdu-specific characters.
The rendering of Nastaliq text in Unicode depends on OpenType font technology, particularly the Glyph Substitution (GSUB) table, which handles complex glyph shaping, ligatures, and contextual forms required for the script's cursive and diagonal baseline characteristics. Platform support varies but has matured: Windows provides full rendering via Uniscribe and DirectWrite for Nastaliq fonts, macOS achieves comprehensive results through Core Text, and Linux distributions offered partial support in earlier versions until enhancements to the HarfBuzz shaping engine in the 2010s enabled robust handling of Nastaliq's intricacies.

Encoding Issues and Solutions

Encoding Nastaliq script digitally presents several challenges due to its cursive nature and stylistic complexities, particularly in handling bidirectional text, ligature formation, and vertical stacking. Bidirectional text conflicts arise because Nastaliq, as a right-to-left (RTL) script, must integrate with left-to-right (LTR) elements like numbers and Latin text, often leading to improper reordering in mixed-content environments without adequate Unicode bidirectional controls or HTML markup support. Incomplete ligature support in basic fonts exacerbates this, as Nastaliq requires extensive contextual glyph substitutions for proper cursive joining, which standard OpenType implementations may not fully render, resulting in disjointed or aesthetically incorrect text. Stacking for vertical alignment further complicates rendering, with letters often positioned diagonally or stacked to simulate traditional calligraphy, creating sloping baselines that challenge horizontal line layouts in digital systems.
Language-specific gaps in Urdu, a primary user of Nastaliq, include the representation of aspirated consonants, which rely on digraphs such as (bh) and (ph) formed from standard Arabic base letters combined with the aspirate marker (U+06BE), necessitating precise glyph positioning that basic Unicode fonts may not support adequately. These digraphs, along with other Urdu extensions like retroflex letters (e.g., , ), draw from the Arabic block (U+0600U+06FF) and its presentation forms, but early digital tools often lacked the contextual variants needed for accurate display. Resolutions emerged with Unicode 5.1 in 2008, which incorporated additional Arabic script characters and properties enhancing support for such combinations, though full integration required subsequent font advancements.
To address these, solutions include specialized rendering tools like Graphite, developed by SIL International, which enables non-OpenType environments to handle Nastaliq's complex joining, collision detection for diacritics, and kerning through font-embedded rules, as demonstrated in the Awami Nastaliq font family. Ongoing discussions in W3C gap analyses prioritize browser and CSS improvements for Urdu layout requirements.
Looking ahead, integration with variable fonts offers scalability, as seen in the Noto Nastaliq Urdu family, which supports weight variations (e.g., Regular to Bold) in a single file for efficient rendering across devices, with major updates in 2024 revising dot positioning and baseline handling.

References

Nasta'liq: The Genius of Persian Calligraphy

1. Be, kf, and short vowels Zer o Zabar - Open Book Publishing

Image 9 of The History of the Urdu Language | Library of Congress

THE HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF CALLIGRAPHY ART FROM THE ...

A Deliberation upon the Early Movements of Nastaliq Calligraphy ...

Persian Aesthetics in Ottoman Albums - Institute for Advanced Study

Identifying and Introducing of Nastaliq Inscriptions Calligraphers in ...

The use of the Nastaliq script in the court of the Mughals of India ...

Mir Imad al-Hasani - Smithsonian's National Museum of Asian Art

Special Collections Showcase April 2024 - Princeton University

Manuscripts in Nastaliq Script | Digital Library of the Middle East ...

The Trajectory of Nasta'lq Printing in the 19th Century Islamicate ...

LITHOGRAPHY i. IN PERSIA - Encyclopaedia Iranica

Persian Alphabet and Writing System | ASPIRANTUM

 CONTEXTUAL SHAPE ANALYSIS OF NASTALIQ

Nasta'liq - Calligraphy Qalam

 Calligraphy in Mughal period in comparison with Iranian ... - Dsource

 THE EYE IS FAVORED FOR SEEING THE WRITING'S FORM

Proportional Scripts | The Metropolitan Museum of Art

Elucidating the Proportional Relations of Letters in Nastaliq Style

https://dlmenetwork.org/library/browse/group/manuscripts/manuscripts-in-nastaliq-script

Tools and Materials - Calligraphy Qalam

Darvish Abdolmajid Taleqani: Pioneer of Shekasteh-Nastaliq in Iran

Shikaste - Calligraphy Qalam

Exploring Urdu Script in Historical Context

Surprising facts about Urdu script you haven't heard before

nastaliq | Art History Glossary

The Fight to Preserve the Urdu Script in the Digital World | TIME

Seeing a class divide through typography - Matnsaz

 Usage of Nasta'liq in the Modern Publications - Typography Day

None

 Computers and Challenges of W riting in Persian - UCSB ECE

InPage Urdu

InPage Features

Noto Nastaliq Urdu - Google Fonts

farsi-fonts/fonts-irannastaliq - GitHub

Arabic and Hebrew features in InDesign - Adobe Help Center

Resources - Awami Nastaliq - SIL Language Technology

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.cspl.inpage

Arabic (Nastaliq variant)Aran - ScriptSource

Chapter 9 Unicode 17.0.0

 Arabic - The Unicode Standard, Version 17.0

https://www.unicode.org/L2/L2002/02468-n2569-10646-1-fpdam2-disposition.pdf

 L2/06-039 - Unicode

Developing OpenType Fonts for Arabic Script - Microsoft Learn

Urdu Gap Analysis - W3C on GitHub

Urdu orthography notes - r12a.io

Arabic Script Gap Analysis - W3C

Awami Nastaliq - SIL Language Technology

Using Graphite to Address Challenges in Nastaliq-style Arabic Script

AI, Volume 6, Issue 8 (August 2025) 33 articles

Next.js Documentation: Font
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion