Netlink Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Netlink
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Netlink is a socket-based inter-process communication (IPC) protocol in the Linux kernel that facilitates the exchange of information between kernel space and user-space processes, as well as among user-space processes, primarily for network configuration, routing, firewall rules, and system events such as audit logs and IPsec updates. It operates using datagram-oriented sockets in the AF_NETLINK address family, supporting both unicast and multicast messaging through a standardized message format that includes a header (nlmsghdr) and variable-length payload, often structured with type-length-value (TLV) attributes for flexibility.
Originally developed as a replacement for the rigid ioctl() system calls and inspired by BSD 4.4 routing sockets, Netlink evolved from an early character device called "Skiplink" implemented by Alan Cox in Linux kernel version 1.3.31 in 1995, before being redesigned as a full socket interface by Alexey Kuznetsov in version 2.1.68 in 1997, with the stable socket-based version appearing in Linux 2.2 in 1999. The protocol was formally described in RFC 3549 in 2003 as an IP services protocol, highlighting its role in kernel-user space interactions for forwarding engines and control plane components, though it remains Linux-specific and non-standardized beyond that document.
Key features of Netlink include support for multiple protocol familiessuch as NETLINK_ROUTE for routing tables, NETLINK_FIREWALL for iptables/netfilter, NETLINK_AUDIT for security auditing, and NETLINK_GENERIC for extensible subsystems introduced in 2005allowing dynamic registration and introspection without fixed structures. It enables asynchronous notifications from the kernel to user space via multicast groups, optional message acknowledgments, and atomic operations for tasks like route additions, but it is not connection-oriented or guaranteed reliable, potentially dropping messages under memory pressure or errors. Libraries like libnl provide user-space APIs to simplify interactions, making Netlink a foundational component for tools such as iproute2 for network management.

Overview

Definition and Purpose

Netlink is a socket-based inter-process communication (IPC) mechanism in the Linux kernel, utilizing the address family AF_NETLINK to enable bidirectional data transfer between user-space processes and kernel modules. This interface operates as a datagram-oriented service, primarily using SOCK_RAW or SOCK_DGRAM socket types, and supports unicast for direct peer-to-peer messaging and multicast for group-based distribution. By leveraging a standardized socket API, Netlink allows user-space applications to interact with kernel subsystems in a structured yet adaptable manner, without relying on device-specific file descriptors.
The primary purpose of Netlink is to facilitate the configuration, control, and monitoring of kernel subsystems, with a particular emphasis on networking features such as routing tables, firewall rules, and interface statistics. It enables flexible message passing by employing a type-length-value (TLV) format for payloads, which avoids the need for rigid C structures and supports extensibility through additional attributes or multipart messages. This design promotes efficient data exchange for tasks like updating kernel state from user-space tools or retrieving dynamic kernel information, such as device events or policy changes.
Netlink was developed as a replacement for the legacy ioctl() interface, addressing its key limitations including poor extensibility, lack of bidirectional support, and challenges in portability across architectures due to fixed command definitions. Unlike ioctl(), which is inherently synchronous and user-initiated, Netlink supports asynchronous operations where the kernel can proactively send notifications to subscribed user-space processes. This core concept of kernel-generated messages complements user-initiated requests, enabling real-time event handling and reducing polling overhead in applications like network daemons.
Various Netlink protocol families, such as NETLINK_ROUTE for routing and NETLINK_AUDIT for security auditing, extend its applicability across different kernel domains.

Key Features and Advantages

Netlink provides robust scalability through its support for multicast groups, enabling multiple user-space processes to receive kernel-generated events efficiently without requiring individual unicast transmissions. Each Netlink family can define up to 32 multicast groups, allowing processes to join specific groups via the bind(2) system call using a bit mask in the nl_groups field, which facilitates one-to-many communication for scenarios like routing updates or device notifications. This multicast capability enhances system efficiency by reducing the overhead of repeated kernel-to-user messaging compared to traditional one-to-one interfaces.
A core aspect of Netlink's flexibility lies in its variable-length message structure, which employs a type-length-value (TLV) encoding for attributes in the payload. This design allows for extensible payloads where new attributes can be added without disrupting backward compatibility, as receivers can ignore unknown types while processing known ones. The message header includes an nlmsg_len field to delineate variable sizes, supporting multipart messages flagged with NLM_F_MULTI and terminated by NLMSG_DONE, which accommodates complex data exchanges while maintaining protocol evolution.
Unlike unidirectional system calls, Netlink enables true bidirectional communication, permitting the kernel to initiate messages to user space for asynchronous notifications, such as event-driven updates. This duplex nature, built on a full-duplex socket model, allows the kernel to push data without user-space polling, addressing limitations in simplex mechanisms where user space must always trigger interactions.
Netlink's advantages include strong portability across different architectures, as it leverages the standard BSD socket API without reliance on architecture-specific structures. It supports asynchronous operation through mechanisms like select(2) and poll(2) on the socket descriptor, enabling non-blocking I/O for efficient event handling. Integration with familiar socket functions, such as socket(2), sendmsg(2), and recvmsg(2), simplifies development by reusing established networking primitives.
In comparison to ioctl, Netlink avoids the pitfalls of fixed-format C structures that often lead to user-kernel mismatches across versions or architectures, offering instead a structured, extensible alternative that eliminates the need for new ioctl commands when extending functionality. It also proves more efficient than reading or writing to /proc or /sys filesystems for dynamic data, as these file-based methods lack native support for large transfers, events, or multicast, often limiting payloads to a single page and requiring constant polling. These attributes collectively position Netlink as a preferred IPC mechanism for modern Linux systems handling networking and configuration tasks.

History and Development

Origins in Linux Kernel

Netlink evolved from an early character device called "Skiplink" implemented by Alan Cox in Linux kernel version 1.3.31 in 1995. It was redesigned as a full socket interface by Alexey Kuznetsov in version 2.1.68 in 1997, with the stable socket-based version introduced in Linux kernel version 2.2, released in 1999. It was primarily developed by Alexey Kuznetsov, building upon Alan Cox's work, to provide a more extensible alternative to traditional mechanisms for network management. This development occurred at the Institute for System Programming of the Russian Academy of Sciences (INR RAS), where Kuznetsov contributed significantly to Linux networking features.
The primary motivations for creating Netlink stemmed from the limitations of existing interfaces, such as ioctl() calls, which were rigid and primarily simplex, lacking support for bidirectional communication or efficient data transfer for network statistics and configurations. Netlink addressed these issues by offering a standardized, asynchronous protocol that enabled multicast capabilities and reduced the need for custom kernel modifications. It drew inspiration from BSD's routing sockets (AF_ROUTE), extending their concepts to support IP service control and forwarding separation in a more flexible manner, allowing user-space processes to query and modify kernel routing tables dynamically.
Early adoption of Netlink centered on its integration with the iproute2 suite of tools, also authored by Alexey Kuznetsov, which replaced older utilities like route and ifconfig for advanced routing management. These tools leveraged Netlink's NETLINK_ROUTE family to interact with the kernel's routing subsystem, enabling efficient policy-based routing and traffic control without relying on deprecated interfaces.
Initially, Netlink focused on networking tasks, such as route manipulation and interface configuration, but was architected with a modular family system to support broader kernel-user space interactions beyond just IP services. This design laid the groundwork for its expansion into other domains, though its core emphasis remained on providing a reliable IPC mechanism for network-related operations.

Evolution and Milestones

Netlink's evolution in the early 2000s saw significant expansions within the Linux kernel, transitioning from its initial focus on routing to broader subsystem integrations. By kernel version 2.4.6, the NETLINK_FIREWALL family was introduced to enable communication for IPv4 packet handling in firewall operations, allowing user-space applications to receive and process packets from the netfilter framework. Similarly, starting with kernel 2.6.6, the NETLINK_AUDIT family provided an interface to the Linux Audit Subsystem, facilitating the transmission of audit records from kernel to user space for security logging and compliance monitoring.
A pivotal advancement came with the introduction of multicast support in kernel 2.6.14, which added socket options like NETLINK_ADD_MEMBERSHIP and NETLINK_DROP_MEMBERSHIP, enabling efficient one-to-many messaging for event notifications across multiple user-space listeners. This was complemented by the launch of Generic Netlink in kernel 2.6.15, which standardized user-defined protocol families through dynamic registration and a simplified API, reducing the need for custom kernel patches and promoting extensibility for new subsystems.
Standardization efforts formalized Netlink's role as an IP services protocol via RFC 3549 in July 2003, which detailed its use for intra-kernel and kernel-user-space messaging, including routing and firewall applications, while emphasizing its TLV-based format for flexibility. IPv6 support was integrated through the NETLINK_ROUTE6 family starting in kernel 2.2, allowing user-space management of IPv6 routing tables and addresses alongside IPv4 equivalents.
To ease user-space development, the libnl library suite was released in the mid-2000s, providing high-level C APIs for Netlink socket handling, message construction, and protocol-specific abstractions, with initial versions like libnl-1.0 appearing around 2005 to abstract raw socket complexities. Experimental support for Netlink extended beyond Linux in 2022, when FreeBSD added an initial implementation of the protocol (per RFC 3549) to its kernel, enabling compatibility for tools like iproute2 and improving cross-platform networking utilities.
In recent years, up to 2025, Netlink has seen enhancements in security and adoption in modern environments. Its role in container orchestration has grown, with Kubernetes networking plugins such as those using the Container Network Interface (CNI) relying on Netlink for route manipulation and interface configuration in environments like Multus or Calico. Furthermore, integrations with eBPF have boosted observability, where eBPF programs load and communicate via Netlink sockets (e.g., using the BPF family) to export telemetry data for network monitoring and tracing, as seen in tools like bpftool and production systems from vendors like Datadog.

Architecture

Socket-Based Interface

Netlink provides a socket-based interface that leverages the standard Berkeley sockets API, enabling user-space applications to communicate with the Linux kernel in a manner consistent with conventional network programming models. This design replaces traditional ioctl() calls with a more extensible socket-oriented approach, supporting bidirectional data exchange for tasks such as network configuration and monitoring.
The address family for Netlink sockets is specified as AF_NETLINK during socket creation, distinguishing it from other families like AF_INET used for TCP/IP. Within this family, protocols are identified by numeric constants; for example, NETLINK_ROUTE, assigned the value 0, is dedicated to routing table modifications, device status updates, and related networking events. Socket types supported include SOCK_RAW and SOCK_DGRAM, both treated equivalently by the Netlink protocol as datagram-oriented, allowing raw access to messages without protocol-specific processing layers.
Netlink incorporates support for PID namespaces, facilitating isolated communication environments particularly useful in containerized systems. The Netlink port ID (nl_pid) in socket addresses refers to the socket within its specific PID namespace, ensuring that processes sharing the same PID across different namespaces maintain distinct communication channels. Error handling follows standard socket conventions, utilizing errno codes such as ENOBUFS to signal receive queue overflows, which requires applications to implement buffer resizing or message resynchronization to prevent data loss.
As ordinary file descriptors, Netlink sockets integrate naturally with Linux's I/O multiplexing facilities, permitting the use of select(2), poll(2), or epoll(7) to monitor multiple sockets concurrently for efficient event-driven programming. Messages exchanged over these sockets adhere to a structured format comprising headers and payloads, as defined in the Netlink message protocol.

Communication Mechanisms

Netlink employs unicast for direct, point-to-point message delivery between the kernel and user-space processes, utilizing port IDs specified in the nl_pid field of the sockaddr_nl structure. In user space, the kernel automatically assigns the nl_pid as the process ID for the initial socket opened by an application, while subsequent sockets receive unique identifiers to enable targeted routing. This mechanism ensures reliable delivery of messages to specific recipients without involving intermediaries.
For broader dissemination, Netlink supports multicast modes through group subscriptions managed via the nl_groups bitmask in the socket address, allowing up to 32 groups per protocol family. User-space applications subscribe to these groups using the NETLINK_ADD_MEMBERSHIP socket option, enabling the kernel to multicast eventssuch as route changes or link status updatesto all interested parties within a group, like RTMGRP_LINK for interface notifications. Only processes with root privileges or the CAP_NET_ADMIN capability can send messages to these groups, though reception is often permitted for other users in families like NETLINK_ROUTE.
Asynchronous notifications facilitate event-driven communication, where the kernel initiates messages to user space for real-time updates, such as interface going up or down, using functions like netlink_unicast on the kernel side to target specific ports. These notifications are crucial for dynamic system monitoring and are commonly used in standard families, for example, routing dumps in the route netlink family. Dump operations enable iterative data retrieval, such as querying routing tables, by setting the NLM_F_DUMP flag in messages; the kernel responds with a sequence of responses, and user space can request acknowledgments via NLM_F_ACK to confirm receipt and handle multi-part dumps reliably.
Queue management in Netlink involves per-socket receive and send buffers that queue incoming and outgoing messages, with default sizes of 212992 bytes (208 KiB) on 64-bit Linux 2.6 and later to balance performance and memory usage. These buffers are configurable using socket options like SO_RCVBUF and SO_SNDBUF (or library wrappers such as nl_socket_set_buffer_size in libnl), allowing applications to increase sizes for high-volume scenarios and prevent overflows, which would otherwise trigger ENOBUFS errors and message drops. Proper sizing is essential for maintaining communication integrity under load, as undelivered messages can lead to incomplete state synchronization between kernel and user space.

Message Format

Basic Packet Structure

Netlink messages are structured as a byte stream beginning with a fixed 16-byte header known as struct nlmsghdr, which provides essential metadata for routing, sequencing, and processing the message.
The header fields are defined as follows:
FieldTypeSize (bytes)Description
nlmsg_len__u324Total length of the message in bytes, including the header and payload; must be at least the size of the header (16 bytes) and a multiple of 4 for alignment.
nlmsg_type__u162Message type indicating the content or purpose, such as RTM_NEWROUTE for a new route notification or NLMSG_ERROR for error reporting.
nlmsg_flags__u162Control flags directing message handling, for example NLM_F_REQUEST to indicate a user-space request to the kernel or NLM_F_MULTI for multipart messages.
nlmsg_seq__u324Sequence number assigned by the sender to track message order and match requests with responses.
nlmsg_pid__u324Port ID of the sender, typically the process ID (PID) in user space or 0 for kernel-generated messages.
This structure ensures 4-byte alignment across the entire message, achieved through padding macros like NLMSG_ALIGN(), promoting architecture independence by avoiding assumptions about native word sizes or endianness in multi-byte fields, which are transmitted in network byte order.
The nlmsghdr format has remained fixed since its introduction in Linux kernel 2.2, with protocol evolution handled through flag extensions rather than header modifications.
The payload, which carries protocol-specific data such as type-length-value attributes, immediately follows the header and has a variable length of nlmsg_len - sizeof(struct nlmsghdr), padded to 4 bytes if necessary.

Attributes and Payload Encoding

Netlink messages encapsulate their variable payload using a sequence of attributes, which provide a flexible, extensible mechanism for conveying kernel-specific data beyond the fixed message header. These attributes follow the header and are parsed independently, allowing for optional or conditional inclusion of information without altering the core message structure. The attribute format adheres to a length-type-value (LTV) scheme, where each attribute is self-describing and aligned for efficient processing.
Each attribute is represented by a 4-byte header followed by its value and any necessary padding. The header consists of a 16-bit length field (nla_len), which specifies the total size of the attribute in bytes (including the header and padding, with a minimum value of 4), and a 16-bit type field (nla_type), which identifies the attribute's semantic meaning within the context of the Netlink family (e.g., RTA_DST for a destination IP address in routing messages). The value portion immediately follows the header and can hold data of varying types, such as integers, strings, or binary blobs, depending on the attribute's policy. To maintain alignment, the entire attributeincluding its valueis padded to the next 4-byte boundary using zero bytes, ensuring that subsequent attributes start at a multiple of 4 bytes from the message's beginning. This padding is calculated using the NLMSG_ALIGN macro, which rounds up to the nearest 4-byte multiple.
Multi-byte values within attributes are encoded in host byte order (little-endian on most architectures) by default, facilitating direct use in kernel and user-space code. However, for attributes requiring portability across endiannesssuch as network-related fieldsthe high bits of the type field can set the NLA_F_NET_BYTEORDER flag (bit 14), indicating that the payload uses network byte order (big-endian). The type field's lower 14 bits (bits 0-13) define the actual type, with bit 14 used for the NLA_F_NET_BYTEORDER flag and bit 15 for the NLA_F_NESTED flag, providing backward compatibility without redefining types.
Attributes support nesting to represent complex, hierarchical data structures. When the NLA_F_NESTED flag (bit 15) is set in the type field, the attribute's value is interpreted as a container holding its own sequence of sub-attributes, each following the standard LTV format. This enables multi-level encoding, such as nesting route metrics within a routing attribute, without fixed-size limitations. Nested attributes must still adhere to overall padding and length rules, and parsers recursively process them until the container's length is exhausted.
Error handling in Netlink leverages attributes for detailed feedback. Responses of type NLMSG_ERROR include a payload with a standard nlmsgerr structure containing an errno value to indicate failure, such as EINVAL for invalid arguments. Since Linux kernel 4.3, if the NETLINK_EXT_ACK flag is set via setsockopt(2), the error payload can include additional TLV attributes providing contextual details, such as pointers to malformed data, enhancing debugging without altering the basic error format.
Modern extensions to Netlink attributes accommodate advanced use cases, including the transmission of binary data. The NLA_BINARY type treats the value as an opaque byte sequence of variable length, subject to policy-defined minimum and maximum sizes, enabling the direct passage of unstructured payloads like bytecode in various protocols.

Families and Protocols

Standard Netlink Families

Netlink standard families consist of predefined numeric protocol identifiers that enable user-space applications to interact with core Linux kernel subsystems through dedicated communication channels. These families are assigned fixed IDs in the kernel's user-space API headers, ensuring consistent addressing across kernel versions. The kernel enforces access to these families based on process capabilities, such as CAP_NET_ADMIN for sending messages or joining multicast groups, while certain families like NETLINK_ROUTE and NETLINK_KOBJECT_UEVENT permit reception by non-privileged users under specific conditions.
The NETLINK_ROUTE family, with ID 0, serves as the primary interface for managing networking configurations, including routing tables, network interfaces, and neighbor tables, allowing user-space tools to query and update these elements in real time. This family is central to tools like iproute2 for handling link events and address assignments without requiring direct kernel modifications.
Historically, the NETLINK_FIREWALL family (ID 3) facilitated the transport of IPv4 packets from the netfilter subsystem to user space for processing firewall rules, integrating with early iptables mechanisms; however, it has been deprecated and repurposed as unused since Linux 3.5, with modern firewall operations shifting to the NETLINK_NETFILTER family. Current iptables and nf_tables integrations rely on NETLINK_NETFILTER (ID 12) to manage netfilter rules, logging, and packet flows efficiently.
The NETLINK_SELINUX family (ID 7) handles event notifications from the SELinux security module, enabling user-space monitoring of security policy enforcements and access decisions. Complementing this, the NETLINK_AUDIT family (ID 9), introduced in Linux 2.6.6, supports the transmission of audit records and logging messages from the kernel's auditing subsystem, allowing tools to track system calls, file accesses, and policy violations for compliance and security analysis.
NETLINK_KOBJECT_UEVENT (ID 15), available since Linux 2.6.10, broadcasts kernel-generated events related to device hotplugging and kobject management to user space, facilitating dynamic hardware detection and response in desktop environments and device managers like udev.
NETLINK_GENERIC (ID 16), introduced in Linux 2.6.15, provides a foundational framework for extending Netlink with custom protocols while maintaining compatibility with the standard socket interface.
An additional standard family, NETLINK_RDMA (ID 20), added in Linux 3.0, supports management and monitoring of Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) resources, particularly for InfiniBand subsystems, enabling user-space control over high-performance networking fabrics. Enhanced RDMA management features, including net namespace support, were integrated starting in kernel 5.3.

Generic Netlink and Custom Protocols

Generic Netlink, identified by the protocol constant NETLINK_GENERIC with family ID 16, serves as a multicast-oriented framework within the Netlink subsystem that facilitates the creation of custom operations and families for kernel-user space communication. It enables dynamic registration of user-defined protocols, allowing subsystems to extend Netlink beyond predefined standards without requiring new socket families. In the kernel, a custom family is registered using the genl_register_family() function, which allocates resources and assigns a unique identifier, typically starting from 17 for custom implementations. This multicast capability supports group-based notifications, where multiple user-space processes can subscribe to events from the kernel.
Protocol definitions for custom Generic Netlink families are structured around operations (ops) specified in a genl_ops array, where user-space applications define commands such as DOIT for single-request handling. Each operation includes a policy defined via struct nla_policy to validate incoming Netlink attributes, ensuring type safety and preventing malformed payloads during message processing. For instance, the ethtool Netlink interface utilizes a custom Generic Netlink family named "ethtool" to manage hardware configuration tasks like querying link modes or setting channel counts on network interfaces, demonstrating practical extensibility for device-specific interactions. Operations are numbered from 0 to 1023, providing ample space for commands while supporting both unicast requests and multicast notifications.
Message handling in custom protocols emphasizes dumps for iterative data retrieval and notifications for asynchronous updates. Dump operations, flagged with NLM_F_DUMP, invoke a DUMPIT callback to generate multi-message responses terminated by NLMSG_DONE, ideal for listing resources like registered families. Notifications leverage multicast groups defined in the family structure, enabling efficient event broadcasting to subscribed sockets. To simplify implementation of these protocols in user space, libraries such as libmnl provide minimalistic abstractions for constructing, parsing, and validating messages, reducing boilerplate code for attribute handling and sequence tracking without imposing heavy dependencies. This approach ensures custom Generic Netlink protocols remain lightweight and reusable across applications.

Usage and API

Socket Creation and Binding

To create a Netlink socket in user space, an application calls the socket() system call with the address family AF_NETLINK, typically using the socket type SOCK_RAW for raw access to Netlink messages, and specifies a protocol identifier corresponding to the desired Netlink family (e.g., NETLINK_ROUTE for routing information). This returns a file descriptor fd upon success, which serves as the handle for subsequent operations on the socket.
The socket address is represented by the struct sockaddr_nl, which includes the field nl_family set to AF_NETLINK to indicate the address family. The nl_pid field specifies the unicast port identifier: a value of 0 allows the kernel to auto-assign a port, while a non-zero value (typically the process ID of the calling application) sets an explicit user-space port for targeted communication. Additionally, the nl_groups field is a bitmask used to subscribe to multicast groups, enabling reception of broadcast messages from the kernel to multiple listeners (defaulting to 0 for no subscriptions).
Binding the socket to a local address is performed using the bind() system call: bind(fd, (struct sockaddr *) &addr, sizeof(addr)), where addr is a struct sockaddr_nl instance configured as described. This step associates the socket with the specified port ID and multicast group subscriptions; if nl_pid is 0, the kernel automatically assigns a unique port ID to the socket. Binding is essential for receiving messages, as unbound sockets cannot listen for incoming data.
Most Netlink operations require elevated privileges, specifically the CAP_NET_ADMIN capability or an effective user ID of 0 (root), particularly for binding to multicast groups or performing administrative actions like atomic message handling. However, certain families support non-privileged access for read-only reception, such as NETLINK_KOBJECT_UEVENT for kernel event notifications, allowing unprivileged processes to bind and receive messages without group subscriptions.
Common errors during socket creation include EAFNOSUPPORT if an invalid address family is specified (e.g., anything other than AF_NETLINK), or EINVAL for unsupported protocol values in the third argument to socket(). Binding may fail with EADDRINUSE if the requested port ID is already in use, or EPERM if the process lacks the necessary CAP_NET_ADMIN capability for the operation.
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <linux/netlink.h>

int fd = socket(AF_NETLINK, SOCK_RAW, NETLINK_ROUTE); // Example for routing family
if (fd < 0) {
 // Handle error, e.g., EAFNOSUPPORT for invalid family
}

struct sockaddr_nl addr = {0};
addr.nl_family = AF_NETLINK;
addr.nl_pid = getpid(); // Or 0 for kernel auto-assignment
addr.nl_groups = 0; // Bitmask for multicast subscriptions

if (bind(fd, (struct sockaddr *)&addr, sizeof(addr)) < 0) {
 // Handle error, e.g., EPERM without CAP_NET_ADMIN
}
This example illustrates the basic sequence, with error handling for privilege-related failures.

Message Transmission and Reception

Netlink messages are transmitted from user space to the kernel or other processes using the sendmsg() system call, which operates on a bound Netlink socket. The call requires a struct msghdr that includes an array of struct iovec elements pointing to the message components, typically starting with a struct nlmsghdr header followed by the payload in TLV-encoded attributes. The msg_name field of the msghdr is set to a struct sockaddr_nl specifying the destination, such as port ID 0 for the kernel, while msg_namelen is sizeof(struct sockaddr_nl). Flags in the nlmsghdr can include NLM_F_REQUEST for queries or NLM_F_ACK to request an acknowledgment from the recipient.
For example, to send a routing query, the sequence number (nlmsg_seq) is incremented per message, and the port ID (nlmsg_pid) in the header is set to the sender's port ID (typically the process ID or the bound socket's nl_pid) to identify the origin:
struct nlmsghdr *nh = /* allocated header */;
nh->nlmsg_pid = getpid(); /* Sender's port ID */
nh->nlmsg_seq = ++sequence_number;
nh->nlmsg_flags = NLM_F_REQUEST | NLM_F_ACK;

struct iovec iov = { nh, nh->nlmsg_len };
struct sockaddr_nl sa = { .nl_family = AF_NETLINK, .nl_pid = 0 }; /* Target kernel */
struct msghdr msg = { .msg_name = &sa, .msg_namelen = sizeof(sa),
 .msg_iov = &iov, .msg_iovlen = 1 };
int len = sendmsg(fd, &msg, 0);
if (len < 0) /* Handle error */;
This ensures reliable delivery attempts, though Netlink is datagram-oriented and may drop messages under memory pressure.
Reception occurs via recvmsg(), which populates the provided iovec buffer with incoming messages, often in batches. A typical buffer size is 8192 bytes to accommodate multiple messages without truncation, and the call returns the total bytes received. Messages are validated using the NLMSG_OK() macro, which checks if nlmsg_len fits within the remaining buffer size, and processed iteratively with NLMSG_NEXT() to advance to the next message:
char buf;
struct iovec iov = { buf, sizeof(buf) };
struct sockaddr_nl sa;
struct msghdr msg = { .msg_name = &sa, .msg_namelen = sizeof(sa),
 .msg_iov = &iov, .msg_iovlen = 1 };
int len = recvmsg(fd, &msg, 0);
if (len < 0) /* Handle error, e.g., ENOBUFS for buffer overflow */;

for (struct nlmsghdr *nh = (struct nlmsghdr *)buf; NLMSG_OK(nh, len); nh = NLMSG_NEXT(nh, len)) {
 if (nh->nlmsg_type == NLMSG_DONE) break;
 if (nh->nlmsg_type == NLMSG_ERROR) {
 struct nlmsgerr *err = (struct nlmsgerr *)NLMSG_DATA(nh);
 /* Handle errno in err->error */
 }
 /* Process payload */
}
Multipart messages, flagged with NLM_F_MULTI, are terminated by NLMSG_DONE.
Message sequencing relies on the nlmsg_seq field to correlate requests with responses, while nlmsg_pid in the header identifies the sender, typically matching the process ID of the originating socket for user-space messages (0 for kernel-originated). The kernel sets nlmsg_pid to 0 for its outbound messages, allowing user-space applications to filter by origin. Acknowledgments, requested via NLM_F_ACK in the sent message, prompt the kernel to reply with an NLMSG_ERROR message containing a struct nlmsgerr payload; a value of 0 indicates success, while negative errno values denote failures like EOPNOTSUPP for unsupported operations. In multi-threaded contexts, sequence numbers must be managed per thread to prevent mismatches, often using thread-local storage or mutex-protected counters, as shared increments can lead to validation failures during response matching.
To close a Netlink socket, invoke close(fd) on the file descriptor, which releases resources and stops further communication. For multicast subscriptions, unsubscription is achieved by rebinding the socket with nl_groups set to 0 in the struct sockaddr_nl, effectively leaving all groups without closing the socket.

Applications

Networking and Routing

Netlink plays a central role in Linux networking by enabling user-space applications to configure and monitor routing tables and network interfaces through the NETLINK_ROUTE family. This family facilitates bidirectional communication between the kernel and user-space processes, allowing for the addition, deletion, and querying of routes as well as the management of device states and addresses.
In routing operations, user-space tools send messages to the kernel via sockets bound to NETLINK_ROUTE. For instance, the RTM_GETROUTE message retrieves routing table entries; when the destination length (rtm_dst_len) and source length (rtm_src_len) fields in the struct rtmsg header are set to 0, the kernel returns all entries for the specified table in a multi-part dump response. To add a new route, the RTM_NEWROUTE message is used, accompanied by attributes such as RTA_GATEWAY, which specifies the next-hop IP address as a protocol address type. These operations ensure that routing configurations, including IPv4 and IPv6 tables, can be dynamically updated without restarting kernel processes.
Interface management leverages similar message types for device lifecycle events and configurations. The RTM_NEWLINK message notifies or configures network interfaces, using the struct ifinfomsg to set flags like IFF_UP for bringing an interface online or IFF_DOWN for taking it offline, often with attributes such as IFLA_IFNAME for the device name or IFLA_MTU for maximum transmission unit. Address assignment occurs via RTM_NEWADDR, where struct ifaddrmsg defines the protocol family (e.g., AF_INET) and attributes like IFA_ADDRESS provide the IP address to bind to the interface index. These mechanisms allow precise control over interface states and IP configurations in real time.
The iproute2 utility suite serves as the primary user-space frontend for these Netlink interactions, with commands like ip route for managing routes and ip link for interface operations. For example, ip route add 192.168.1.0/24 via 10.0.0.1 translates to an RTM_NEWROUTE message with the appropriate gateway attribute, while ip link set eth0 up issues an RTM_NEWLINK to toggle the interface flags. Similarly, querying the ARP table involves sending an RTM_GETNEIGH message with struct ndmsg specifying the family (e.g., AF_INET for IPv4 ARP entries), prompting the kernel to dump neighbor entries including link-layer addresses via attributes like NDA_LLADDR. Kernel notifications for link changes, such as interface up/down events, are delivered asynchronously via multicast groups in NETLINK_ROUTE, where user-space processes join groups like RTNLGRP_LINK (1) using setsockopt with NETLINK_ADD_MEMBERSHIP to receive RTM_NEWLINK or RTM_DELLINK messages.
Netlink's design supports efficient handling of large routing tables through a dump-and-acknowledge cycle, where requests flagged with NLM_F_DUMP (combining NLM_F_ROOT for full table dumps and NLM_F_MATCH for filtering) elicit multi-part responses marked with NLM_F_MULTI, ending in NLMSG_DONE. User-space applications can request acknowledgments via NLM_F_ACK to confirm message processing, enabling reliable synchronization even for extensive datasets like full route dumps, which avoids the overhead of individual queries. This approach ensures scalability in high-volume networking environments.

Other Kernel-User Interactions

Netlink extends beyond core networking to facilitate kernel-user interactions in device management and security contexts, leveraging dedicated protocol families for event notifications and policy management.
In device management, the NETLINK_KOBJECT_UEVENT family, introduced in Linux 2.6.10, enables the kernel to broadcast hotplug events to userspace, such as USB device insertions or removals, allowing dynamic handling of hardware changes. Userspace tools subscribe to this multicast socket to receive structured uevent messages containing device attributes like action type (e.g., "add" or "remove") and subsystem details. For instance, the udev daemon subscribes to NETLINK_KOBJECT_UEVENT via a raw Netlink socket, processing these events to create or remove /dev entries and trigger associated rules for device initialization. This mechanism replaced earlier hotplug handlers, providing a scalable IPC path for managing diverse peripherals without polling.
For security applications, Netlink supports interactions with firewall, auditing, and access control subsystems. The NETLINK_NETFILTER family, available since Linux 2.6.14, allows userspace tools to configure and query netfilter rules, including updates to nf_tables chains for packet filtering and NAT. The nft command-line utility compiles rules into Netlink messages using libraries like libnftnl, transmitting them to the kernel for enforcement, while the kernel responds with status via extended ACKs. Similarly, NETLINK_AUDIT, introduced in Linux 2.6.6, delivers audit logs from the kernel to userspace daemons like auditd, which opens a NETLINK_AUDIT socket to receive records of security-relevant events such as file accesses or syscall invocations. NETLINK_SELINUX, since Linux 2.6.4, notifies userspace of SELinux policy changes and enforcement decisions, enabling tools to react to AVC denials or load new modules without kernel recompilation.
Additional uses include monitoring and diagnostics, where Generic Netlink enables custom protocols for tools like ethtool. The ethtool utility employs a Generic Netlink family named "ethtool" to query and set network interface parameters, such as link modes or offload features, bypassing ioctl for more flexible attribute-based exchanges. In emerging cloud-native environments of the 2020s, Netlink underpins container orchestration plugins, including those for device passthrough in Kubernetes, extending its role in dynamic resource management across virtualized workloads.

References

netlink(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

RFC 3549 - Linux Netlink as an IP Services Protocol - IETF Datatracker

 The Netlink protocol: Mysteries Uncovered

Introduction to Netlink - The Linux Kernel documentation

Netlink Protocol Library Suite (libnl)

Kernel Korner - Why and How to Use Netlink Socket - Linux Journal

https://nscpolteksby.ac.id/ebook/files/Ebook/Computer%20Engineering/Linux%20Kernel%20Networking%20-%20Implementation%20(2014

 Communicating between the kernel and user-space in Linux using ...

rtnetlink - Speaker Deck

RFC 3549: Linux Netlink as an IP Services Protocol

Netlink Protocol Families | Hitch Hiker's Guide to Learning

Netlink on FreeBSD - The FreeBSD Project

Debugging netlink requests - Julia Evans

rt_route.yaml - The Linux Kernel Archives

socket(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Netlink Library (libnl)

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3549#section-3.2

libmnl: Netlink attribute helpers - Netfilter.org

netfilter: nf_tables: add ebpf expression - LWN.net

networking:generic_netlink_howto 

Introduction to Generic Netlink, or How to Talk with the Linux Kernel

Netlink interface for ethtool - The Linux Kernel documentation

https://netfilter.org/projects/libmnl/

rtnetlink(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

netlink(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

ip(8) - Linux manual page - man7.org

IPROUTE2 Utility Suite Documentation - Policy Routing

udev: Device Manager for the Linux Kernel in Userspace - Insu Jang

The netfilter.org "nftables" project

audit_open(3) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Network Plugins - Kubernetes
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion