Node.js Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 7 days ago 
Node.js
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment that allows developers to execute JavaScript code server-side, outside of a web browser, primarily designed for building scalable network applications through its asynchronous, event-driven architecture. This runtime leverages Google's V8 JavaScript engine to enable non-blocking I/O operations, handling thousands of concurrent connections efficiently without traditional thread-based models, using an event loop as its core construct. Created by Ryan Dahl and first released in 2009, Node.js draws inspiration from event-driven systems like Ruby's Event Machine and Python's Twisted, emphasizing low-latency streaming and HTTP-first capabilities for web development.
As an open-source project maintained by the OpenJS Foundation, Node.js has evolved into a foundational technology for modern web servers, APIs, real-time applications, and microservices, powering platforms like Netflix, Uber, and LinkedIn, with approximately 4,600 Node.js-related job postings added daily on LinkedIn worldwide based on the number of jobs listed as posted in the past 24 hours, reflecting strong industry demand and popularity. due to its performance in I/O-intensive tasks. Key features include support for child processes to leverage multi-core processors via clustering, a vast ecosystem through the npm package manager with millions of modules, and built-in modules for networking, file systems, and cryptography, making it suitable for full-stack JavaScript development.
Node.js is the appropriate runtime for building web servers and handling backend logic through frameworks such as Express, Fastify, or NestJS, which manage HTTP requests, APIs, and server-side processing. In contrast, React is a client-side JavaScript library for building user interfaces in the browser and lacks native capabilities for creating or managing web servers. While React Server Components (introduced in React 18 and matured in subsequent versions) and frameworks like Next.js enable server-side rendering (SSR), static site generation (SSG), and API routes for React applications, these technologies operate on Node.js or compatible runtimes such as Bun or Deno. Thus, Node.js remains essential as the underlying runtime for server-side execution in full-stack JavaScript development, and there is no direct competition between Node.js and React for web server creation, as they fulfill complementary rolesNode.js for the backend server and React (often with Next.js) for the frontend interface.
Its lightweight nature and ability to integrate with front-end tools have democratized server-side programming, fostering frameworks like Express.js and contributing to the growth of the JavaScript ecosystem beyond client-side scripting.

Introduction

Definition and Purpose

Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment that executes JavaScript code server-side, outside the constraints of a web browser. It is built on Google's V8 JavaScript engine, originally developed for the Chrome browser, which compiles JavaScript directly to native machine code for high performance. This setup allows developers to run JavaScript on the backend, bridging the gap between client-side and server-side programming without requiring a new language.
The primary purpose of Node.js is to facilitate the creation of scalable network applications, particularly those involving intensive input/output (I/O) operations, by employing an asynchronous, event-driven model. This design emerged to address the challenges of traditional blocking I/O in backend development, enabling JavaScript to handle concurrent operations efficiently and avoid the pitfalls of thread-based concurrency, such as deadlocks. Node.js utilizes an event loop as a core mechanism to manage non-blocking behavior, supporting thousands of simultaneous connections in a single process.
Common use cases for Node.js include building web serversfor instance, using frameworks such as Express, Fastify, or NestJS to handle HTTP requests, create APIs, and implement backend logicdeveloping real-time web applications via WebSockets, constructing microservices for distributed systems, scripting command-line tools, and powering desktop applications through frameworks like Electron.
Node.js is the appropriate technology for creating web servers due to its design as a server-side JavaScript runtime specifically intended for handling HTTP requests, APIs, and backend logic. React, by contrast, is a JavaScript library for building user interfaces in the browser on the client side and lacks native capabilities for creating or running web servers directly.
Advancements such as React Server Components (introduced in React 18 and matured in subsequent versions) and frameworks like Next.js enable server-side rendering, server-side logic, and data fetching with React components. However, these features and frameworks operate on top of Node.js or compatible JavaScript runtimes such as Deno or Bun. Thus, Node.js (or an equivalent runtime) remains essential for executing server-side code in React-based applications.
In summary, Node.js and React fulfill complementary roles in full-stack JavaScript development rather than directly competing for the task of building web servers: Node.js provides the backend runtime infrastructure, while React handles frontend user interfaces.

Core Characteristics

Node.js is fundamentally designed around an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model, which enables it to handle concurrent operations efficiently without relying on traditional threading mechanisms. This paradigm allows the runtime to process multiple requests simultaneously by registering callbacks for I/O events, such as network or file operations, rather than blocking the main thread while waiting for responses. As a result, Node.js excels in building scalable network applications, like web servers that can manage thousands of simultaneous connections with minimal resource overhead.
At its core, Node.js operates on a single-threaded execution model, leveraging asynchronous programming patterns including callbacks, promises, and async/await syntax to manage I/O-intensive tasks without halting execution. This approach ensures high performance for applications where I/O operationssuch as database queries or API callspredominate over CPU-bound computations, as the event loop delegates blocking operations to the operating system's thread pool. By avoiding the complexities of multi-threading, such as race conditions and locks, Node.js simplifies development while maintaining efficiency in handling asynchronous workflows.
Node.js offers broad cross-platform compatibility, officially supporting Linux (including distributions such as Ubuntu, Debian, and Red Hat), Windows (version 8.1 and later, with 32-bit and 64-bit support), macOS (version 10.15 and later, including arm64), FreeBSD (x64, version 13.2 and later), SmartOS (x64, version 18 and later), AIX (ppc64, version 7.2 and later), and other platforms such as IBM i and Solaris in select configurations, with official binaries available for architectures including x86 (32-bit and 64-bit), ARM (various versions), and more to facilitate deployment across diverse environments.
A key philosophical underpinning of Node.js is the "JavaScript everywhere" paradigm, which advocates using JavaScript across the entire application stackfrom client-side browsers to server-side logicthereby streamlining full-stack development and reducing context-switching for developers. This unified language approach fosters code reusability, such as sharing modules between frontend and backend, and has contributed to Node.js's adoption in diverse domains beyond traditional web servers.
To support essential functionalities out of the box, Node.js includes a set of built-in modules that provide low-level access to system resources without external dependencies. Notable among these are the HTTP and HTTPS modules for creating streaming web servers, the fs module for asynchronous file system interactions, and the stream and buffer modules for efficient data handling in pipelines and binary processing. These core utilities embody Node.js's emphasis on modularity and performance, allowing developers to build robust applications directly on the runtime.

Installation

Node.js can be installed using various methods depending on the operating system, including official installers, version managers like nvm, or package managers.
On macOS, Homebrew provides access to specific versions through its core repository.
To install the current stable version of Node.js (24.14.0) using Homebrew:
brew install node@24
This formula is keg-only, meaning the binaries are not symlinked into /usr/local/bin (or /opt/homebrew/bin on Apple Silicon) by default to avoid conflicts with other installed versions or system components. It is scheduled for deprecation on 2027-04-30. The formula provides pre-compiled bottles for macOS (Apple Silicon and Intel) and Linux (ARM64 and x86_64).
To use the installed version as the default node and npm commands, link it explicitly:
brew link --force node@24
The --force option may be required if another version is already linked. Alternatively, manually add the installation directory to your PATH environment variable, for example:
On Apple Silicon macOS:
export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/node@24/bin:$PATH"
On Intel macOS:
export PATH="/usr/local/opt/node@24/bin:$PATH"

For Apple Silicon macOS

Node.js 22 provides native arm64 binaries for macOS (darwin-arm64) and is fully compatible with Apple Silicon M5 chips, as the M5 uses the same ARM64 architecture as prior M1M4 chips, enabling native execution without reported compatibility issues.
export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/node@22/bin:$PATH"

For Intel macOS

export PATH="/usr/local/opt/node@22/bin:$PATH"

Add the appropriate line to your shell configuration file (e.g., `~/.zshrc` or `~/.bash_profile`) to make it persistent.

# For Debian 13 (Trixie)
Node.js can be installed on Debian 13 (codename Trixie) using packages from the NodeSource repository.

To configure the NodeSource repository for a specific Node.js version, execute the appropriate setup script. For the Long Term Support (LTS) version, run:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_lts.x | sudo -E bash -
For the latest current version:
curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_current.x | sudo -E bash -
Or for a specific major version (e.g., 22.x):
curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_22.x | sudo -E bash -
After adding the repository, update the package index and install Node.js:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y nodejs
In cases where key verification fails due to Debian 13's policy changes regarding SHA1 signatures, manually fetch and install the GPG key:
curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/gpgkey/nodesource-repo.gpg.key | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /etc/apt/keyrings/nodesource.gpg
Adjust the output path if necessary to match your sources configuration. NodeSource supports Debian 13, with compatibility fixes for key issues applied by early 2026.

History

Origins and Initial Development

Node.js was created by Ryan Dahl in 2009 as an open-source, cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment designed for building scalable network applications. Dahl first publicly demonstrated the project at JSConf EU in Berlin on November 8, 2009, where it received significant attention for its innovative approach to server-side development. The initial version was developed to enable JavaScript execution outside the browser, drawing on Google's V8 engine from the outset to compile JavaScript directly to native machine code for improved performance.
The project's inspirations stemmed from existing event-driven frameworks, particularly Ruby's EventMachine and Python's Twisted, which emphasized non-blocking I/O models to handle high concurrency without thread-based overhead. Dahl's primary motivation was to overcome the inefficiencies of traditional web servers like Apache, whose blocking I/O modelwhere each request tied up a thread until completionstruggled with latency from operations such as disk access (averaging 41 million CPU cycles) or network calls (up to 240 million cycles). By extending JavaScript's event-driven paradigm to the server side, Node.js aimed to create a lightweight, single-threaded environment where I/O operations used asynchronous callbacks, allowing a single process to manage thousands of concurrent connections efficiently, similar to Nginx's event loop architecture.
The first public release, version 0.1.0, arrived on May 27, 2009, initially supporting only Linux and focusing on core features like TCP, DNS, and HTTP protocols with built-in support for streaming and keep-alive connections. Later in 2009, Joyent provided crucial funding and corporate backing by hiring Dahl, marking Node.js's transition from a personal project to one with sustained development resources. Early adoption grew through the project's GitHub repository, which facilitated community contributions and hosted around 14 initial developers by late 2009. Key early contributors included Tim Caswell, the creator of the Narwhal JavaScript runtime, who joined the core team and helped refine modules and documentation systems.

Evolution and Key Milestones

Node.js saw significant early momentum in 2010 with the release of version 0.2.0, which included foundational improvements to process handling and networking capabilities. That same year, the Node Package Manager (npm) was introduced by Isaac Z. Schlueter on January 12, providing the first centralized registry and package management system for Node.js modules, revolutionizing dependency handling and ecosystem growth. Although npm was initially a separate tool, its integration with Node.js distributions began shortly thereafter, enabling rapid adoption; for instance, companies like LinkedIn began leveraging Node.js for mobile backends around this period to achieve lighter, faster services.
From 2011 to 2014, Node.js faced internal challenges over governance and release cadence, leading to the creation of the io.js fork in December 2014 by developers seeking faster iteration and more open collaboration. The fork addressed disputes with Joyent, Node.js's original steward, by adopting a semi-monthly release cycle and broadening contributor access. This division prompted reconciliation efforts, culminating in 2015 when the io.js and Node.js communities merged their codebases under the newly formed Node.js Foundation, backed by the Linux Foundation, to unify development and ensure sustainable governance. The merger produced Node.js version 4.0 in September 2015, marking a stable LTS release and restoring a single project trajectory.
Organizational evolution continued in 2018 with the announcement of a merger between the Node.js Foundation and the JS Foundation, forming the OpenJS Foundation under the Linux Foundation umbrella, effective in 2019, to foster broader JavaScript and web technology stewardship. Key technical milestones during this era included the stabilization of async/await syntax in version 8.0 (May 2017), which simplified asynchronous code by leveraging ES2017 features in the V8 engine. In version 12.0 (April 2019), ECMAScript modules (ES modules) advanced to phase two of implementation, enabling native import/export syntax with improved loader support, though full stabilization arrived in v14. Version 14.0 (April 2020) further enhanced native addon development by adopting ABI-stable interfaces via N-API, reducing recompilation needs across Node.js versions and addressing ARM architecture mismatches.
As of 2025, Node.js emphasizes robust security through regular updates, with multiple releases in January, May, and July addressing vulnerabilities like path traversal and HashDoS in V8. Influences from alternatives like Denocreated by Node.js founder Ryan Dahl to rectify early design regretshave prompted Node.js to incorporate native TypeScript support and stricter module resolutions in recent versions. Similarly, integration with serverless platforms such as AWS Lambda has driven optimizations for cold starts and dependency bundling, shaping Node.js toward more efficient, edge-deployable runtimes. In version 22 (April 2024, now LTS), enhancements include improved diagnostic reporting for memory issues and stack traces, alongside stable watch mode for development workflows.

Architecture

Platform Fundamentals

Node.js employs a layered architecture that separates concerns for efficient runtime operation. At the top is the application layer, where developers write JavaScript code that interacts with Node.js APIs for tasks like file handling or networking. This layer executes on the V8 JavaScript engine, which compiles and runs the code in a single-threaded manner. Beneath V8 lies libuv, a cross-platform C library that abstracts operating system-specific details for I/O operations, enabling Node.js to function uniformly on Windows, macOS, Linux, and other platforms.
The libuv library forms the foundation for Node.js's asynchronous capabilities by managing non-blocking I/O, timers, and file system operations. It provides a unified API for handling TCP/UDP sockets, DNS resolution, asynchronous file reads/writes, and file system events, shielding JavaScript code from platform differences through mechanisms like epoll on Linux, kqueue on macOS, and IOCP on Windows. This abstraction allows Node.js to scale for high-throughput applications without direct OS-level programming. libuv also integrates the event loop to process callbacks efficiently, though its detailed mechanics are handled separately.
Key core components enhance Node.js's usability as a development platform. The Read-Eval-Print Loop (REPL), implemented via the node:repl module, offers an interactive environment for executing JavaScript snippets, evaluating expressions, and accessing modules directly from the command line, supporting features like auto-completion and input history. Built-in global objects, such as process for runtime control and information (e.g., emitting events like 'uncaughtException' or queuing microtasks with process.nextTick()) and global as the namespace for Node-specific properties, are available across all modules without explicit imports. These globals bridge JavaScript execution with system-level interactions.
JavaScript execution in Node.js begins with V8 parsing the source code into an abstract syntax tree, followed by just-in-time (JIT) compilation to machine code for optimized performance. V8, implemented in C++, handles object creation, function calls, and garbage collection, supporting large-scale applications with thousands of lines of code. C++ bindings in Node.js extend this by wrapping system callssuch as those for file I/O or network requestsallowing JavaScript to invoke libuv functions seamlessly without blocking the main thread. This process ensures low-latency execution suitable for server-side scripting.
In contrast to browser environments, Node.js omits the Document Object Model (DOM) and Browser Object Model (BOM), which are unavailable as there is no rendering engine or web page context. Instead, it introduces server-oriented APIs, including the fs module for synchronous and asynchronous file system operations (e.g., reading directories or streaming files) and the net module for creating TCP/UDP servers and clients to handle network communications. These differences position Node.js for backend tasks like API servers, while browsers focus on client-side interactivity.

Event Loop Mechanism

The event loop in Node.js is a core mechanism that enables non-blocking, asynchronous I/O operations within a single-threaded execution model, allowing the runtime to handle multiple concurrent requests efficiently by processing callbacks when events occur rather than waiting for them. This loop continuously checks for new events and executes associated callbacks, ensuring that CPU-intensive tasks do not halt the entire process.
Implemented by the libuv library, a cross-platform C library, the event loop operates as a single-threaded construct that polls for I/O events using system-specific mechanisms such as epoll on Linux, kqueue on macOS, or IOCP on Windows. Libuv manages the loop through functions like uv_run(), which iterates until no active handles or requests remain, dispatching callbacks for timers, I/O completions, and signals without spawning additional threads for I/O handling. This design prioritizes low-latency responsiveness for I/O-bound applications, though it can be complemented by worker threads for CPU-intensive workloads.
The event loop progresses through distinct phases in each iteration, processing specific types of callbacks:

Timers: Executes callbacks scheduled by setTimeout() and setInterval() once their delay thresholds are met.

Pending Callbacks: Handles I/O callbacks deferred from previous cycles, such as TCP errors (e.g., ECONNREFUSED).

Idle/Prepare: Internal phases used by libuv for preparation and cleanup, not directly accessible to JavaScript code.

Poll: Retrieves new I/O events; executes their callbacks and may block until an event occurs or a timer expires, with libuv enforcing a polling limit to avoid starvation.

Check: Runs callbacks from setImmediate() after the poll phase completes.

Close Callbacks: Processes 'close' events for handles like sockets.

Within this structure, tasks are categorized as microtasks or macrotasks to determine execution priority. Microtasks, such as those queued by process.nextTick() or Promise resolutions (e.g., .then() callbacks), are processed immediately after the current operation completes but before the next macrotask iteration, ensuring they run in the same loop turn. Macrotasks, including timers and setImmediate() callbacks, are deferred to their respective phases in the subsequent iteration. The order is: process.nextTick queue first, followed by the Promise microtask queue, then the macrotask queue.
A practical example of asynchronous handling occurs in an HTTP server, where incoming requests trigger non-blocking I/O operations. When a client connects, the poll phase detects the event via libuv's polling mechanism; the server registers a callback that executes upon data receipt, allowing the event loop to continue processing other requests during the wait (e.g., a 45ms database query leaves the loop free for additional connections). This concurrency model supports high throughput without threads, as the loop queues and dispatches responses sequentially upon completion.
Common pitfalls arise when synchronous code blocks the event loop, such as using fs.readFileSync() or computationally expensive operations like parsing large JSON objects, which can delay all pending callbacks and reduce request throughput. For instance, a 50MB JSON stringify operation may take 0.7 seconds, stalling the loop and affecting every client during that time. Vulnerable regular expressions can exacerbate this, leading to exponential denial-of-service risks. To mitigate, developers should favor asynchronous APIs and offload heavy computations to worker pools.

JavaScript Engine

V8 Integration

Node.js embeds the V8 JavaScript engine, Google's open-source, high-performance runtime for executing JavaScript and WebAssembly code, which has been integral to the platform since its initial release in 2009 to enable efficient server-side JavaScript execution. V8 compiles JavaScript directly to native machine code, bypassing the need for intermediate bytecode interpretation in many cases, which contributes to Node.js's speed in handling I/O-bound operations.
The integration occurs through Node.js's C++ embedder API, which allows the runtime to manage V8's core components such as isolatesindependent instances of the JavaScript virtual machinecontexts for script execution environments, and the engine's garbage collection system to handle memory allocation and deallocation efficiently. This API enables Node.js to initialize V8, execute JavaScript code within the event-driven architecture, and expose native bindings while isolating JavaScript execution from the underlying C++ layers.
Node.js maintains close alignment with V8 releases to incorporate the latest ECMAScript features and performance enhancements; for instance, as of Node.js version 25.0.0 released in October 2025, it includes V8 14.1, supporting advanced syntax like top-level await introduced in ECMAScript 2022. Key benefits of this integration include V8's just-in-time (JIT) compilation via its TurboFan optimizer, which dynamically compiles frequently executed code paths to machine code, and inline caching mechanisms that accelerate property access and method calls by predicting and optimizing based on runtime patterns.
Node.js extends V8's capabilities with tools like the V8 Inspector protocol, which integrates with Chrome DevTools for remote debugging, breakpoints, and step-through execution of JavaScript code in a Node.js process. Additionally, V8's heap snapshot functionality is exposed in Node.js to capture the state of the JavaScript heap at runtime, aiding in memory leak detection and profiling by serializing object graphs into JSON for analysis in tools like Chrome DevTools.

Performance Optimizations

Node.js provides several built-in mechanisms to optimize performance, particularly for scaling across multi-core systems, efficient data processing, and resource management. The cluster module enables the creation of child processes that share a single server port, allowing applications to utilize multiple CPU cores by distributing incoming connections among worker processes. This multi-process approach improves throughput for I/O-bound workloads without requiring external load balancers, as the master process forks workers based on the number of available cores via os.cpus().length.
For CPU-intensive tasks, Node.js incorporates worker threads, which allow offloading computations to separate threads while maintaining the single-threaded event loop in the main process. Introduced in version 10.5.0 and stabilized in later releases, worker threads communicate via message passing and are particularly effective for parallelizing operations like data encryption or image processing, preventing blocking of the primary event loop.
Profiling tools are integral to identifying bottlenecks, with Node.js offering built-in CPU and heap profilers accessible via command-line flags. The --cpu-prof flag generates sampling-based CPU profiles during runtime, capturing hotspots in JavaScript execution, while --heap-prof enables heap allocation tracking to detect memory patterns. These profiles can be processed using the --prof-process flag or external tools compatible with V8's format, such as Chrome DevTools, to visualize call graphs and optimize code paths.
Data handling optimizations focus on minimizing memory overhead and I/O latency. Buffer pooling, managed internally by the Buffer class, reuses pre-allocated memory blocks to reduce allocation costs when working with binary data, enhancing performance in scenarios like file uploads or network protocols. Similarly, stream piping via the stream.pipe() method connects readable and writable streams directly, limiting backpressure and buffering to process large datasets chunk-by-chunk without loading entire payloads into memory.
Memory management in Node.js leverages V8's heap configuration, where the --max-old-space-size flag sets the maximum size (in MiB) for the old generation space, preventing out-of-memory errors in long-running applications by capping long-lived object storage. For leak detection, heap snapshots generated with --heapsnapshot-signal=SIGUSR2 or the v8.writeHeapSnapshot() API allow comparison of memory states over time using tools like Chrome's Memory tab, revealing retained objects and unintended references.
As of 2025, recent enhancements include upgrades to the Undici HTTP client in Node.js 24, which introduces improved connection pooling, stricter HTTP/2 compliance, and faster request handling through optimized multiplexing and reduced latency in persistent connections. Benchmarks on Node.js v20 with 1,000 concurrent connections demonstrate Undici achieving approximately 18,000 requests per second (RPS) throughput and a p99 latency of about 85 ms, compared to approximately 3,200 RPS and 450 ms p99 latency for the core http module, and 2,800 RPS and 600 ms for Axios. This performance indicates up to 3x higher RPS and 65% lower latency than these alternatives. Additionally, top-level await, fully supported in ES modules since version 14.8, simplifies asynchronous initialization by allowing await expressions outside functions, reducing reliance on callbacks or immediate async wrappers in module loading.

Modules and Ecosystem

Module Systems

Node.js provides two primary module systems for organizing and loading code: CommonJS (CJS) and ECMAScript modules (ESM). These systems enable developers to encapsulate functionality, manage dependencies, and promote reusability in server-side JavaScript applications. The choice between them affects loading behavior, bundling efficiency, and compatibility with modern JavaScript standards.
CommonJS, the original module system introduced with Node.js, uses a synchronous require() function to load modules and module.exports (or the shorthand exports) to define what a module exposes. For example, a module might export an object like module.exports = { add: (a, b) => a + b };, which can then be imported via const { add } = require('./math');. This system treats modules as singletons, caching results to avoid reloading, and supports dynamic exports that can be modified at runtime. CommonJS was designed for server-side environments, prioritizing simplicity over browser compatibility, and remains the default for files without explicit ESM indicators.
In contrast, ECMAScript modules, based on the ES6 standard, employ asynchronous import and export syntax for a more declarative approach, such as export const add = (a, b) => a + b; and import { add } from './math.mjs';. The --experimental-modules flag was removed in Node.js version 12.17.0 (May 2020), with ESM considered stable starting from version 14.0.0 (April 2020), allowing modules to be enabled via the .mjs file extension or by setting "type": "module" in package.json. Unlike CommonJS, ESM enforces static analysis, enabling features like tree-shaking in bundlers to eliminate unused code, and prohibits top-level variable hoisting for exports, promoting predictable dependency resolution. Node.js maintains dual support for backward compatibility, permitting mixed usage through dynamic import() calls, which work in both systems and return promises.
Key differences between CommonJS and ESM include loading semantics and interoperability: CommonJS permits dynamic require() calls anywhere and supports runtime export modifications, while ESM requires static imports at the top level and uses import.meta for module metadata (replacing __filename and __dirname). ESM's static nature facilitates better optimization but requires explicit handling for CommonJS interop, such as via createRequire from the module API. For backward compatibility, Node.js allows .cjs extensions to force CommonJS interpretation even in ESM packages.
Module resolution in Node.js follows a unified algorithm for both systems, prioritizing core built-in modules, then checking for file or directory paths (relative ./ or absolute /), and finally searching node_modules directories up the file tree. Bare specifiers like import 'lodash' resolve to installed packages in node_modules without path prefixes. The legacy NODE_PATH environment variable can append custom search paths (colon-separated on Unix, semicolon on Windows), though it is largely superseded by the standard node_modules convention. ESM resolution additionally mandates file extensions for relative and absolute URLs to align with browser standards.
As of 2025, Node.js offers full ESM support, including dynamic imports for conditional loading and JSON modules via import data from './config.json' with { type: 'json' };, which parses JSON synchronously without needing require. This evolution aligns Node.js more closely with web platform standards while preserving CommonJS for legacy codebases.
Node.js includes several built-in core modules, some of which have been deprecated over time to encourage the use of community-maintained alternatives. For instance, the punycode module, which provides functionality for encoding and decoding Punycode strings used in internationalized domain names, was deprecated in documentation-only form in Node.js version 7.0.0 to promote adoption of third-party alternatives available via npm. Runtime deprecation warnings for its usage were introduced in version 21.0.0.

Package Management with npm

npm serves as the default package manager for Node.js, bundled with the runtime since version 0.6.3 released in 2011. Originally developed to facilitate sharing JavaScript modules, npm has evolved into a comprehensive tool for managing dependencies and project workflows. As of October 2025, npm is at version 11.6.2, incorporating optimizations such as improved caching mechanisms that accelerate package installations by reusing previously downloaded assets.
At its core, npm provides essential commands for package lifecycle management. The npm install command downloads and installs dependencies listed in the project's package.json file, which acts as a central manifest defining dependencies, development dependencies, scripts, and metadata like the package name and version. Developers use npm publish to upload packages to the public registry, enabling global sharing, while npm run executes custom scriptssuch as build or test processesoutlined in the package.json "scripts" section. These commands integrate seamlessly with Node.js module systems, allowing installed packages to be imported and utilized in applications.
The npm registry hosts nearly 3.5 million packages as of October 2025, establishing it as the world's largest single-language software repository and powering a vast ecosystem for JavaScript development. While npm remains the standard, alternatives like Yarn and pnpm address specific needs, such as deterministic installations that ensure identical dependency trees across environments through lockfiles.
Security is a key aspect of npm, with built-in tools to mitigate risks in the ecosystem. The npm audit command analyzes installed dependencies against a database of known vulnerabilities, providing reports and fix recommendations to help developers remediate issues promptly. Additionally, the .npmrc configuration file allows customization, including specification of scoped registries for private or enterprise package sources, enhancing control over secure package sourcing.
Best practices in npm usage emphasize reliability and maintainability. Semantic versioning (semver) is strictly enforced, where package versions follow the MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH format to indicate breaking changes, new features, or bug fixes, ensuring predictable updates. Lockfiles, such as package-lock.json generated by npm, capture exact dependency versions and resolve the full dependency tree, enabling reproducible builds and preventing discrepancies in team or CI/CD environments.

Advanced Technical Features

Threading and Concurrency

Node.js operates on a single-threaded model by default, where the JavaScript event loop runs on the main thread to handle asynchronous I/O operations without blocking, but synchronous CPU-intensive tasks can halt execution on that thread. This design excels for I/O-bound workloads, as the event loop delegates non-blocking operations to the underlying libuv library, but it limits parallelism for compute-heavy JavaScript code.
To address CPU-bound tasks, Node.js introduced the Worker Threads API as an experimental feature in version 10.5.0, stabilizing it in version 12.0.0. This API enables the creation of additional threads that run independent JavaScript contexts, allowing parallel execution of code outside the main thread. Communication between the main thread and workers occurs via message passing, using methods like postMessage() on the parentPort in workers and the worker object in the parent, with data serialized and copied to prevent direct memory access by default.
Worker threads are particularly suited for offloading CPU-intensive operations, such as cryptographic computations or image processing, where the main thread remains responsive to incoming requests. For scenarios requiring shared data without serialization overhead, Node.js supports SharedArrayBuffer instances, which allow threads to access the same memory region directly, facilitating efficient parallel algorithms like parallel sorting. However, SharedArrayBuffer usage demands careful synchronization using the Atomics API to avoid race conditions, as unsynchronized access can lead to data corruption.
Despite these capabilities, worker threads have limitations: they do not share mutable state by default, relying on message passing that incurs copying costs for large objects, and thread creation introduces overhead from context switching and memory allocation. They are ineffective for I/O-bound work, where the event loop already provides sufficient concurrency.
As of 2025, enhancements in Node.js versions, including improved diagnostics via the worker_threads module's monitoring APIs and better integration with the Cluster module for combining multi-process scaling with intra-process threading, have made worker threads more robust for production-scale parallel processing.

Native Bindings and Addons

Native bindings and addons in Node.js enable developers to extend the runtime's functionality by integrating C or C++ code, particularly for performance-intensive operations that surpass pure JavaScript capabilities. These addons act as bridges between JavaScript and native libraries, allowing access to system-level resources, optimized algorithms, or third-party C/C++ ecosystems while maintaining Node.js's event-driven architecture. By compiling native code into dynamically loadable modules, addons can be required like standard JavaScript modules, providing seamless interoperability.
The primary interface for creating these addons is Node-API (N-API), introduced as an experimental feature in Node.js version 8.0 and stabilized thereafter. N-API serves as a successor to the Native Abstractions for Node.js (NAN) library, offering a stable Application Binary Interface (ABI) that decouples addons from specific versions of the underlying JavaScript engine, such as V8. This stability ensures that compiled addon binaries remain compatible across multiple Node.js releases without recompilation, reducing maintenance overhead for developers. For instance, N-API handles object lifetime management, error propagation, and data type conversions between JavaScript and C/C++ in a runtime-agnostic manner.
Building native addons typically involves the node-gyp tool, a cross-platform command-line utility bundled with npm for compiling C/C++ code against Node.js headers. Developers define build configurations in a binding.gyp file, which specifies source files, libraries, and compilation flags; node-gyp then generates platform-specific binaries using tools like GYP (Generate Your Projects). Prominent examples include node-sqlite3, which provides asynchronous SQLite database bindings for efficient data storage and querying, and bcrypt, a native implementation for secure password hashing that leverages optimized C routines to perform computationally expensive operations. These addons demonstrate how node-gyp facilitates integration with established libraries like SQLite or OpenSSL.
Common use cases for native addons focus on accelerating computations and accessing hardware not natively supported by JavaScript. For example, image processing tasks can be offloaded to bindings for OpenCV, such as opencv4nodejs, enabling real-time computer vision operations like face detection or edge filtering with significantly higher throughput than equivalent JavaScript implementations. Similarly, addons can interface with hardware peripherals, such as GPIO pins on embedded devices via libraries like node-wiring-pi, allowing Node.js applications to control sensors or actuators in IoT scenarios.
Native addons can implement either synchronous or asynchronous operations, with the latter recommended to preserve Node.js's non-blocking I/O model. Synchronous bindings execute directly on the main thread, potentially blocking the event loop during CPU-bound tasks, whereas asynchronous ones utilize libuvthe asynchronous I/O library underlying Node.jsto queue operations on libuv's thread pool or handle them via callbacks and promises. This approach ensures that long-running native computations, such as cryptographic hashing in bcrypt, do not halt JavaScript execution, maintaining responsiveness in server environments.
Older addon development relied on V8-specific APIs, such as v8::Handle or direct access to V8 internals, which tied modules to particular engine versions and required frequent recompilation. These APIs have been progressively deprecated since Node.js version 14, with warnings issued for usages like process.binding access in addons, to encourage migration to the more portable N-API. As a result, post-v14 Node.js releases enforce stricter compatibility, rendering many legacy V8-dependent addons incompatible without updates.

WebAssembly Support

Node.js introduced support for WebAssembly in version 8.3.0, released on August 10, 2017, initially behind the --experimental-wasm flag, enabling developers to compile and execute WebAssembly modules experimentally. By Node.js 8.3.0, which incorporated V8 engine version 5.9, this support became available without flags in the Node.js 8 series, marking a stable integration for loading and running WebAssembly binaries in the first LTS release line. Today, Node.js provides full support for both WebAssembly binary format (.wasm) modules and the human-readable WebAssembly Text Format (.wat), allowing seamless compilation and instantiation of modules generated from languages like C, C++, Rust, and AssemblyScript.
WebAssembly execution in Node.js leverages the V8 engine's built-in compiler, which translates WebAssembly bytecode into optimized machine code for near-native performance on the host CPU. Developers can load and instantiate modules using the global WebAssembly API, such as WebAssembly.instantiate(), which compiles a .wasm file or buffer and creates an executable instance callable from JavaScript. This instance exposes exported functions, memory, and tables to JavaScript, enabling bidirectional interactionfor example, passing data from JS to WebAssembly for computation and retrieving results.
Common use cases include porting performance-critical libraries from C or Rust to Node.js environments, such as image processing or cryptographic operations, where WebAssembly provides a portable binary alternative to native addons. Tools like wasm-pack facilitate Rust-to-WebAssembly compilation, allowing libraries to be published to npm and imported directly in Node.js applications for tasks like serverless functions or data-intensive computations. For instance, Rust-based tokenizers from Hugging Face have been ported to WebAssembly for efficient natural language processing in Node.js backends.
WebAssembly modules in Node.js operate within a sandboxed linear memory model, preventing direct access to the DOM (irrelevant in server-side contexts) or host resources for security, with all file I/O and system interactions mediated through JavaScript APIs like fs. This isolation ensures memory safety but requires explicit JS bridging for operations like reading files. As of November 2025, enhancements include stable SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) support since Node.js 16.4, enabling vectorized operations for accelerated numerical workloads, and integration with the WebAssembly System Interface (WASI) via the experimental node:wasi module, which exposes POSIX-like system calls for broader portability. Additionally, Node.js 24.5.0 removed the --experimental-wasm-modules flag, stabilizing dynamic imports and exports for WebAssembly modules.

Releases and Maintenance

Versioning Policy

Node.js adheres to Semantic Versioning (SemVer), structuring its version numbers in the format MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, where increments to the major version introduce breaking changes, minor versions add backwards-compatible features, and patch versions include backwards-compatible bug fixes.
The project maintains three primary release lines to balance innovation and stability: the Current line, which delivers the latest features and receives updates for approximately six months; Active Long-Term Support (LTS), providing 12 months of focused updates including security fixes and minor features; and Maintenance LTS, offering 18 months of security and critical bug fixes only.
New major versions are released on a biannual cadence, with even-numbered majors (e.g., 22, 24) launched in April and odd-numbered majors (e.g., 23, 25) in October; odd-numbered majors remain in Current status without entering LTS, while even-numbered majors transition to Active LTS after six months and then to Maintenance LTS.
Deprecations are handled through runtime warnings emitted via process.emitWarning(), with the --pending-deprecation flag enabling warnings for pending deprecations even within node_modules dependencies, and experimental features gated behind runtime flags such as --experimental-*.
For native addon compatibility, Node.js guarantees Application Binary Interface (ABI) stability within each major version, allowing addons compiled against a specific major to work across its minor and patch releases; the N-API provides ABI-stable headers for cross-major compatibility.
As of February 24, 2026, the latest Current release is v25.7.0 (released February 24, 2026), and the latest Active LTS version is v24.14.0 (released February 24, 2026). Version 25.x remains in Current status, 24.x is in Active LTS, 22.x is in Maintenance LTS, and 20.x is in Maintenance LTS.

Long-Term Support (LTS)

The Long-Term Support (LTS) program for Node.js provides extended stability for production environments by designating specific major versions for prolonged maintenance, ensuring reliable updates over an extended period. This program aligns with Node.js's semantic versioning policy, where even-numbered major releases qualify for LTS status.
LTS versions progress through defined phases to balance ongoing support with resource allocation. The Initial phase lasts approximately 6 months (30 weeks) after release, during which the version is considered "Current" and receives active development, including new features and bug fixes. Following this, the Active LTS phase spans 12 months, focusing on bug fixes and security updates to maintain stability without introducing new features. The Maintenance LTS phase then lasts 18 months, limited to critical bug fixes and security patches, after which the version reaches end-of-life (EOL) and receives no further support. Overall, LTS versions receive critical support for a total of 30 months, making them suitable for enterprise and production deployments.
Selection for LTS occurs post-release for even-numbered major versions, such as v20 (LTS from October 2023 until April 2026) and v22 (LTS from October 2024 until April 2027), announced after the Initial phase concludes. Odd-numbered majors, like v21 and v23, remain "Current" for only 6 months before becoming unsupported. This approach ensures that production users can rely on a predictable cadence of stable releases.
As of February 24, 2026, the latest Node.js version is v25.7.0 (Current release), released February 24, 2026. The latest LTS version is v24.14.0 (Active LTS), released February 24, 2026.
Key benefits of LTS include enhanced stability for mission-critical applications, with security vulnerabilities backported from newer versions to prevent disruptions. Organizations benefit from reduced risk in long-term deployments, as LTS versions are recommended for production use where consistency outweighs the need for cutting-edge features. To facilitate management across projects, tools like Node Version Manager (nvm) allow seamless switching between versions, while a .nvmrc file enables project-specific version pinning for reproducible environments.
The LTS program faces challenges in balancing rapid innovation in the Node.js ecosystem with the need for sustained stability, requiring careful prioritization of backports and resource commitment from the maintenance team.

Governance and Community

OpenJS Foundation Oversight

The Node.js Foundation was established in 2015 by the merger of the Node.js and io.js communities, under the auspices of the Linux Foundation, to provide neutral governance, foster collaboration, and advance the platform's development and adoption. Founding members included Joyent, IBM, Microsoft, and others, marking a shift toward vendor-neutral stewardship. In March 2019, the Node.js Foundation merged with the JS Foundation to create the OpenJS Foundation, also hosted by the Linux Foundation, consolidating oversight for a broader array of JavaScript projects including Node.js. This merger aimed to streamline resources, enhance cross-project coordination, and promote the JavaScript ecosystem's sustainability.
Under the OpenJS Foundation, Node.js governance is led by the Technical Steering Committee (TSC), a group of more than 15 active members nominated from the contributor community, representing diverse organizations such as IBM, Microsoft, and others with significant involvement in Node.js development. The TSC provides high-level technical direction, approves release schedules, manages working groups, and ensures adherence to community standards, while delegating day-to-day operations to subcommittees. Complementing the TSC, the OpenJS Foundation's Board of Directors handles strategic oversight, funding allocation, and legal matters, ensuring alignment with the foundation's mission to support open JavaScript technologies.
Funding for Node.js maintenance and community activities is primarily driven by corporate sponsorships through the OpenJS Foundation's tiered membership model, including Platinum and Gold levels that provide substantial financial support. These sponsors, such as IBM and Nearform, enable investments in critical infrastructure like continuous integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD) systems and events including the annual Node.js Collaboration Summit, which facilitates in-person contributor discussions and planning.
Node.js aligns with evolving JavaScript standards through active collaboration between the TSC and TC39, the committee responsible for ECMAScript specifications, ensuring timely implementation of features like modules and async/await to maintain compatibility across the ecosystem. As of 2025, the OpenJS Foundation prioritizes long-term sustainability via the Ecosystem Sustainability Program, which supports security audits and maintenance for end-of-life projects; diversity initiatives, including scholarships and partnerships to broaden underrepresented participation; and cross-project harmonization through the Cross Project Council, which coordinates efforts among hosted projects to standardize practices and reduce fragmentation.

Contribution and Development Processes

Contributions to Node.js are managed through a GitHub-based workflow, where individuals fork the official repository at github.com/nodejs/node, report bugs or propose enhancements by creating issues, and submit changes via pull requests (PRs). Before a PR can be merged, contributors must sign the Contributor License Agreement (CLA) administered by the OpenJS Foundation, ensuring that the project can distribute and sublicense the code. This process applies to both individuals and organizations, facilitating collaborative development while protecting the project's intellectual property.
The review process for PRs involves initial triage and approval by active collaborators, who are experienced contributors with commit access to the core repository. For significant core changes, particularly those labeled as breaking (semver-major), the Technical Steering Committee (TSC) provides final approval, acting as the arbiter in cases of disagreement or ecosystem impact. All PRs undergo automated continuous integration (CI) testing via GitHub Actions, which runs comprehensive test suites across multiple platforms and Node.js versions to verify functionality and performance. Changes are categorized using semantic versioning (semver) labelssuch as semver-major for breaking changes, semver-minor for backward-compatible additions, and semver-patch for fixesto guide release planning and notify users of potential impacts.
Community engagement occurs through dedicated channels, including the official Node.js Discord server launched in March 2025 for real-time discussions and project updates, as well as Slack communities like Node Slackers and the OpenJS Foundation workspace with Node.js-specific channels. The TSC holds weekly meetings to discuss priorities, review agendas submitted via labeled issues, and stream proceedings publicly on YouTube, fostering transparency. Additionally, Node.js User Groups organize local events and meetups worldwide to connect developers and promote grassroots involvement.
Documentation for contributions is outlined in the CONTRIBUTING.md file in the core repository, which details expectations for code quality, testing, and submission etiquette. API documentation is maintained on the official Node.js website, with contributions encouraged through PRs that update markdown files or source code comments. Code style enforcement relies on tools like ESLint, configured in the repository to ensure consistency in JavaScript formatting and best practices during reviews.
Under the oversight of the OpenJS Foundation, Node.js promotes inclusivity through a Code of Conduct based on the Contributor Covenant, which sets standards for respectful interactions in all project spaces. As of 2025, efforts include mentorship programs aimed at newcomers, providing guidance on contributions and pairing mentees with experienced developers to build skills and encourage long-term participation. These initiatives help lower barriers for diverse contributors, aligning with broader community norms of collaboration and accessibility.

References

Node.js About Node.js

Introduction to Node.js

Express - Node.js web application framework

Node.js WebSocket

Build cross-platform desktop apps with JavaScript, HTML, and CSS | Electron

Overview of Blocking vs Non-Blocking - Node.js

Node.js

 node.js - Amazon S3

11 Years Of Node.JS: Timeline & Significant Contributions - Habr

Node.js Sponsor Company Joyent Lands An Extra $85 Million

Node.js ChangeLog

An abbreviated history of JavaScript package managers

Node at LinkedIn: The Pursuit of Thinner, Lighter, Faster - ACM Queue

Future of Popular Coding Tool in Doubt After It Splits in Two | WIRED

Q&A: Why io.js decided to fork Node.js - InfoWorld

Node.js Foundation Combines Node.js and io.js Into Single ...

Node.js Foundation Advances Community Collaboration ...

Node.js Foundation and JS Foundation Merge to Form OpenJS ...

Node.js Node.js v8.0.0 (Current)

Node.js Node.js v12.0.0 (Current)

Node.js v14.0.0 (Current)

Tuesday, January 21, 2025 Security Releases - Node.js

Why the creator of Node.js created a new JavaScript runtime

Node.js 22 runtime now available in AWS Lambda

Node.js 22 is now available!

libuv documentation

REPL | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Global objects | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

The V8 JavaScript Engine - Node.js

Differences between Node.js and the Browser

The Node.js Event Loop

uv_loop_t Event loop - libuv documentation

Understanding setImmediate() - Node.js

Don't Block the Event Loop (or the Worker Pool) - Node.js

V8 JavaScript engine

C++ embedder API | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Getting started with embedding V8 - V8.dev

Node.js v25.0.0 (Current)

Documentation - V8 JavaScript engine

V8 | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Using Heap Snapshot - Node.js

Cluster | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Worker threads | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Profiling Node.js Applications

Command-line API | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Buffer | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Stream | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Node.js v24.0.0 (Current)

await - JavaScript - MDN Web Docs - Mozilla

ECMAScript modules | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

CommonJS modules | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

Semver: Tilde and Caret - NodeSource

package.json - npm Docs

npm | Home

About semantic versioning - npm Docs

SharedArrayBuffer - JavaScript - MDN Web Docs

Node.js multithreading with worker threads: pros and cons | Snyk

Node.js Multi-Threading with Worker Threads - DEV Community

Improved WebAssembly Support is Coming to Node.js

Node.js with WebAssembly

Insights of Porting Hugging Face Rust Tokenizers to WASM

Using SIMD in WebAssembly (Part 1) - DEV Community

WebAssembly System Interface (WASI) | Node.js v25.1.0 ...

https://semver.org/

GitHub - nodejs/Release: Node.js Release Working Group

Deprecated APIs | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

ABI Stability - Node.js

Node-API | Node.js v25.1.0 Documentation

https://nodejs.org/en/about/releases

Node.js Project Governance

Become a member and support the OpenJS Foundation!

Members | OpenJS Foundation

Interview with Node.js Technical Steering Committee Chair - InfoQ

Announcing the Ecosystem Sustainability Program (ESP) with ...

Diversity & Inclusion | LF Events

Projects | OpenJS Foundation

Contribute to nodejs/node - GitHub

Project Governance - Node.js

https://github.com/nodejs/node/blob/main/doc/contributing/collaborator-guide.md

Pull requests nodejs/node - GitHub

Node.js Launches Official Community Space on Discord

Get involved - Node.js

nodejs/TSC: The Node.js Technical Steering Committee - GitHub

node/CONTRIBUTING.md at main nodejs/node

nodejs/mentorship: Node.js Mentorship Program Initiative - GitHub

Node.js BUILDING.md: Supported Platforms

Deprecations | Node.js v23.1.0 Documentation

Why `undici` is Faster Than Node.jss Core `http` Module (And When to Switch)

React A JavaScript library for building user interfaces

React Server Components

Next.js by Vercel - The React Framework

Fastify Official Site

NestJS Official Site

React Official Documentation

React Server Components Reference

Next.js Official Site

Node.js v25.6.1 Release Announcement

Node.js v24.13.1 Release Announcement

Homebrew Formula for node@22

Node.js Jobs in Worldwide

Node.js Downloads

node@24 Homebrew Formulae

Node.js 25.7.0 (Current)

Node.js 24.14.0 (LTS)

NodeSource Distributions README
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion