npm Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 7 days ago 
npm
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 npm (Node Package Manager) is the default package manager for JavaScript and the Node.js runtime environment. It is widely used in both server-side and client-side JavaScript development, particularly in frontend projects built with frameworks such as React, Vue, and Vite, where it handles dependency installation, management, and script execution.
npm enables developers to install, share, and reuse open-source code packages from a centralized registry, which hosts more than 2 million packages as of 2026, making it the world's largest software repository. The core of an npm-managed project is the package.json manifest file, which contains project metadata, lists production dependencies (required for runtime) and devDependencies (used during development and build processes), and defines custom scripts (e.g., "start": "react-scripts start" or "build": "vite build"). The automatically generated package-lock.json file locks exact dependency versions to ensure reproducible installations across different environments.
Common workflows include npm install to install all dependencies from package.json (or a specific package such as npm install lodash), npm run &lt;script&gt; to execute defined scripts (e.g., npm start or npm run build), npx to run executables without global installation (e.g., npx create-vite), and other commands such as npm ci for clean installs from the lockfile, npm audit for security checks, and npm outdated to identify updates. Originally released in 2010 by Isaac Z. Schlueter as an open-source project to facilitate modular code sharing for Node.js, npm has become integral to JavaScript development workflows, supporting both server-side and client-side applications through command-line operations defined in package.json.
Developed initially to address the lack of standardized module sharing in early Node.js ecosystems, npm introduced semantic versioning and dependency resolution mechanisms that promoted reusable components over monolithic codebases. Its adoption exploded alongside Node.js, powering much of modern web development by allowing rapid prototyping and integration of libraries for tasks ranging from HTTP servers to data processing. However, npm's reliance on unvetted third-party contributions has led to significant vulnerabilities, including supply-chain attacks where malicious code is injected into popular packages, affecting millions of downloads weekly.
A defining controversy occurred in 2016 with the unpublishing of the left-pad utility package, a 17-line module removed by its maintainer due to a naming dispute, which cascaded to break builds across the JavaScript ecosystem since thousands of projects depended on it indirectly. In response, npm, Inc.the commercial entity formed around the tool and later acquired by GitHubimplemented policies restricting package removals to prevent such disruptions, underscoring the tension between maintainer autonomy and ecosystem stability. Despite these challenges, npm's CLI tool remains bundled with Node.js installations, ensuring its dominance while alternatives like Yarn and pnpm address performance critiques through innovations in caching and deduplication.

Core Functionality and Features

Package Installation and Management

Npm is the default package manager for JavaScript and Node.js, widely used in frontend development to install, manage, and run dependencies and scripts in projects such as React, Vue, or Vite applications.
The package.json file is the project's manifest, containing metadata, dependencies (required in production, e.g., React, lodash), devDependencies (required for development and build processes only, e.g., vite, eslint, typescript), and a scripts section defining custom commands (e.g., "start": "react-scripts start", "dev": "vite", "build": "vite build").
To initialize a project and create or update package.json, run npm init for an interactive prompt or npm init -y (or --yes) for defaults without questions.
The npm install command installs packages from the npm registry into the local node_modules directory, along with their recursive dependencies. Running npm install without arguments reads dependencies and devDependencies from package.json and installs all listed packages. By default, at the end of the installation process, npm displays a message such as "{X} packages are looking for funding" if any installed packages include funding information provided by their maintainers in their package.json files. This standard feature in recent npm versions, including v11, encourages support for open-source maintainers; users can run npm fund to view details and funding URLs.
To add packages, use npm install &lt;package-name&gt;, which adds them to dependencies by default (since npm 5). Examples:
npm install react@18 lodash axios # Adds to dependencies (production)
npm install --save-dev vite eslint typescript # Adds to devDependencies (development tools)
npm install axios react@latest
Packages can use semantic versioning specifiers: caret (^) allows compatible minor and patch updates (e.g., ^18.2.0 allows >=18.2.0 <19.0.0), tilde (~) allows only patch updates (e.g., ~18.2.0 allows >=18.2.0 <18.3.0), or exact versions without prefix.
Flags modify behavior:

--save-dev or -D adds to devDependencies

--save-exact or -E saves exact versions

--no-save installs without updating package.json

Global installations for CLI tools use -g, e.g., npm install -g nodemon. On Unix-like systems, permission issues may require configuration changes or tools like nvm to avoid sudo. On Windows, bundled npm may require separate updates or PATH adjustments.
npx executes package binaries without global installation, fetching temporarily if needed (e.g., npx create-vite my-app --template react to scaffold a Vite + React project).
Scripts in package.json are run with npm run &lt;script&gt; (e.g., npm run dev, npm run build), with shortcuts like npm start for the "start" script.
Other common commands include:

npm ci: clean install from package-lock.json for reproducible CI/CD builds

npm outdated: checks for available updates

npm update: upgrades packages within semver ranges

npm uninstall &lt;package&gt;: removes from node_modules and package.json

npm audit: scans for vulnerabilities

npm fund: displays funding information for dependencies that have it

npm install axios react@latest # Installs multiple packages with specific versions/tags and adds to dependencies
npm install package1 package2 package3 # Installs multiple packages and adds to dependencies
npm install vite --save-dev # Adds to devDependencies
npm install some-package --save-exact # Saves exact version
npm install express --no-save # Installs without updating package.json
npm install -g nodemon # Global install for development server
npm uninstall lodash # Removes lodash and updates package.json
npm ci # Clean install from lockfile
npm outdated # Check for updates
npm run dev # Run dev script
npx create-vite my-app # Scaffold project
For reproducibility, npm install generates or respects package-lock.json, locking exact versions. Best practices include regular npm audit for security, preferring actively maintained packages with high adoption to mitigate supply-chain risks.

Dependency Resolution and Lockfiles

npm resolves dependencies by parsing the semver ranges in a project's package.json, which allow specifying flexible version requirements using operators such as caret (^) for compatible minor and patch updates (e.g., ^1.2.3 permits >=1.2.3 <2.0.0), tilde (~) for patch updates only (e.g., ~1.2.3 permits >=1.2.3 <1.3.0), or exact versions for pinning (e.g., "1.2.3"). In frontend dependency management, caret ranges are commonly preferred to enable automatic receipt of non-breaking bug fixes and features while preserving major version compatibility. npm then recursively installs packages from the npm registry, constructing a dependency tree within the node_modules directory. Primary dependencies listed in package.json are placed at the root level, while their subdependencies are installed in nested node_modules subdirectories unless hoisted. This process prioritizes the highest version satisfying all specified ranges without a full constraint-solving algorithm, potentially allowing multiple versions of the same package if conflicts arise from incompatible ranges.
In addition to standard semver resolution, npm provides the overrides field in package.json as an advanced mechanism for explicitly controlling dependency versions during the resolution process. This feature allows forcing specific versions for direct or transitive dependencies, which is useful for resolving version conflicts, patching vulnerabilities, enforcing consistency, or ensuring compatibility. Overrides take precedence over normal resolution rules and can be specified as simple version strings or nested objects to target precise locations in the dependency tree.
A common syntax error with nested overrides is "npm ERR! Override without name", which occurs when an empty string "" is mistakenly used as a key instead of "." to reference the parent package or its direct dependencies.
Incorrect example causing the error:
"overrides": {
 "parent-pkg": {
 "": "1.0.0"
 }
}
Correct syntax:
"overrides": {
 "parent-pkg": {
 ".": "1.0.0"
 }
}
The "." key is used to override the package's own version or its direct dependencies in nested overrides.
Beginning with version 3.0.0 in 2015, npm introduced a hoisting mechanism to flatten the dependency tree, reducing redundancy and nesting by elevating compatible dependencies to the highest possible level in the tree where their version satisfies requirers from multiple packages. Hoisting occurs post-resolution during installation: npm scans the tree and moves packages upward if no version conflicts exist, but retains nesting for packages requiring specific incompatible versions to avoid breaking dependents. This flattening improves performance and disk usage but can introduce peer dependency issues if not all consumers are considered.
The package-lock.json file addresses variability in resolution by locking the exact dependency tree. Introduced in npm 5.0.0 on May 25, 2017, it automatically generates during npm install or updates, recording precise versions, resolved structure, and SHA-512 integrity hashes for every package and transitive dependency. Unlike package.json, which uses flexible ranges (e.g., ^1.0.0), the lockfile specifies fixed versions (e.g., 1.0.1) to guarantee identical installations across environments, preventing drift from registry updates within ranges. This reproducibility is essential for collaborative development environments, including team-based frontend projects, continuous integration pipelines, and deployments, to ensure consistent behavior and avoid "works on my machine" discrepancies.
Committing package-lock.json to version control is standard practice for reproducibility in teams and CI/CD pipelines, enabling "time-travel" to prior states via diffs and optimizing subsequent installs by reusing resolved metadata. The best practice for handling node_modules in a Git repository remains to exclude it entirely by adding "node_modules/" to your .gitignore file and never committing it. This keeps repositories lightweight, speeds up cloning/pulling/pushing, avoids platform-specific issues, and relies on package.json + lockfiles (package-lock.json) to reproducibly install dependencies via npm install. This consensus holds as of early 2026 with no major changes in tooling or recommendations.
The file's format evolves with npm versions, denoted by lockfileVersion: 1 for npm 56, 2 for 78, and 3 for 9 and later, with backward compatibility for older files during upgrades. The npm ci command is recommended for clean and reproducible installations, particularly in CI/CD environments, as it strictly enforces the lockfile by automatically removing any existing node_modules directory, failing if the lockfile is missing or inconsistent with package.json, and never modifying package.json or the lockfile. In contrast, npm install may update the lockfile if dependencies change; deleting it forces fresh resolution. For a complete reset after dependency conflicts, practitioners commonly delete the node_modules directory and package-lock.json file using platform-appropriate commands (e.g., rm -rf node_modules on Unix-like systems), clear the npm cache with npm cache clean --force, and then run npm install, optionally with flags like --legacy-peer-deps to temporarily ignore peer dependency conflicts during installation; this applies the legacy (npm v6) resolution algorithm to bypass strict checks introduced in npm v7, but may result in runtime issues from version mismatches. Prior to lockfiles, npm-shrinkwrap.json served a similar but manual role, now superseded.

Publishing and Versioning

Packages in npm follow the Semantic Versioning (SemVer) 2.0.0 specification, which structures version numbers as MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH (e.g., 1.2.3). In this scheme, MAJOR increments for incompatible API changes, MINOR for backwards-compatible feature additions, and PATCH for backwards-compatible bug fixes; pre-release versions append identifiers like -alpha.1, and build metadata uses + (e.g., 1.0.0-alpha+001). npm enforces unique versions per package name across the registry, preventing republishing of identical versions to maintain integrity.
To update a package's version before publishing, developers run the npm version command, which modifies the version field in package.json, creates a Git commit and tag with the new version, and optionally pushes changes. Available update types include major, minor, patch, premajor, preminor, prepatch, and prerelease, defaulting to patch if unspecified; this automates adherence to SemVer rules while integrating with version control. The package.json file requires a valid SemVer-compliant version field for any package intended for publication.
Publishing occurs via the npm publish command, which bundles specified files from the package directoryexcluding those in .npmignore or .gitignore by defaultand uploads them to the npm registry (public by default at registry.npmjs.org). Authentication requires an npm account via npm login, with scoped packages (prefixed like @scope/name) supporting public or private visibility based on account settings. The process includes running prepublishOnly and publish scripts from package.json if defined, allowing custom preparation like building or testing. Upon success, the package becomes installable via npm install <name>, resolving to the highest version matching the requested range (e.g., ^1.2.3 allows 1.x.x updates but not 2.0.0).
npm supports distribution tags (dist-tags) to alias versions, such as latest (default for installations without specifiers) or custom tags like next for beta releases; these are managed with npm dist-tag commands and do not alter the underlying SemVer but guide consumer resolution. For reproducibility, package-lock.json locks exact versions during dependency resolution, though publishing focuses on the top-level package's metadata and tarball. Violations of SemVer in practice can lead to dependency breakage, as evidenced by historical incidents like the 2016 left-pad removal, which underscored the registry's version immutability.

Configuration (.npmrc)

The .npmrc file is the standard configuration file for npm. The ".nprmc" extension does not exist as a standard file type and is a common misspelling of ".npmrc". It is an INI-formatted text file that stores various npm settings, such as registry URLs, authentication tokens, proxy configurations, and other behaviors.
The file can exist in multiple locations with the following precedence order (higher precedence overrides lower):

Per-project: located in the project root directory (sibling to package.json), applying only to that project.

Per-user: located at ~/.npmrc in the user's home directory.

Global: located at $PREFIX/etc/npmrc.

Built-in: npm's unmodifiable default settings.

This precedence allows overriding defaults at increasingly specific scopes, from global to project-specific.

Architecture and Registry

The npm Registry Structure

The npm registry operates as a centralized database of JavaScript packages, where each package comprises executable software bundled in a gzipped tar archive (.tgz file) alongside JSON-formatted metadata detailing attributes such as dependencies, versions, authors, and licensing. This structure enables efficient distribution and resolution of over 2 million unique packages as of recent counts, serving as the default repository at https://registry.npmjs.org.
Metadata for a given package is exposed through a RESTful API endpoint via GET /<package-name>, returning a comprehensive JSON document that includes fields like name (the package identifier), versions (an object mapping semantic version strings to version-specific metadata, such as dist.tarball URLs pointing to the archive), dist-tags (for aliasing versions like "latest"), maintainers, license, and timestamps for creation and modification. Scoped packages, prefixed with @scope/, are URL-encoded in requests (e.g., @scope%2Fpackage) to maintain namespace isolation for organizations. An abbreviated metadata variant, requested with the Accept: application/vnd.npm.install-v1+json header, omits extraneous fields to optimize installation workflows by npm install.
Underlying storage separates metadata from binaries: CouchDB historically managed both, but since February 2014, tarball attachments were migrated to Joyent's Manta object storage to address scaling limitations with over 250,000 package versions, while metadata persists in lightweight replicas like SkimDB (attachment-free for faster replication) or FullfatDB (with reattached tarballs for complete mirrors). The registry adheres to the CommonJS Package Registry specification for read operations, allowing npm to resolve packages by name and version, and supports write APIs for publishing (PUT with tarball and metadata), unpublishing (limited to within 24 hours on the public registry), and deprecation. Replication endpoints, such as https://skimdb.npmjs.com/registry, facilitate read-only mirrors to distribute load and enable private proxies or enterprise caching.

Scoped Packages and Organizations

Scoped packages in npm utilize a namespacing convention with the prefix @scope/, followed by the package name, enabling developers to publish packages without name collisions that affect unscoped packages. This mechanism groups related packages under a common scope, which is owned by either an individual npm user account or an organization, and supports both public and private visibility. Scoped packages are installed via commands like npm install @scope/package, and required in code as require('@scope/package'), with dependencies on scoped packages functioning identically to unscoped ones.
Support for publishing and installing scoped packages was introduced in npm version 2.0.0, released on September 22, 2014, as part of enhancements to handle enterprise needs for private modules while maintaining compatibility with the public registry. Prior to this, package naming was limited to global uniqueness, leading to frequent conflicts as the registry grew beyond 350,000 packages by early 2017. Scopes also facilitate access control: public scoped packages are freely installable, while private ones require authentication tied to the owning scope.
Organizations in npm extend scoped functionality for collaborative management, allowing multiple users to share ownership of a scope for publishing, maintaining, and accessing packages. Created by any npm user, organizations function as paid or free entitiesfree for public packages only, with billing for private package storage and team features beyond basic limits. They enable fine-grained permissions, such as designating members as owners, admins, or collaborators, who can then publish under the organization's scope (e.g., @myorg/utils). This structure supports team workflows, including two-factor authentication enforcement and package-level access revocation, addressing scalability issues in large development teams. As of October 2023, organizations remain integral for enterprise adoption, integrating with npm's registry to mirror user scopes but with enhanced governance.

Caching and Offline Support

npm employs a caching system to store downloaded packages and metadata, reducing redundant network requests and accelerating subsequent installations. The cache utilizes a content-addressable storage mechanism implemented via the _cacache directory within the configured cache path, ensuring efficient retrieval based on package integrity hashes. By default, the cache directory is located at ~/.npm on POSIX systems (e.g., Linux, macOS) and %LocalAppData%\npm-cache on Windows. Users can view or modify the cache location using npm config get cache or npm config set cache <path>.
Cache management commands include npm cache verify, which checks for corruption by validating package integrity against the registry, and npm cache clean --force, which removes all cached data to free disk space or resolve issues. During npm install, the CLI preferentially consults the cache before fetching from the registry, storing new tarballs and metadata for future use; this behavior can be tuned via configuration flags like cache-lock-stale for handling stalled locks. The cache supports scoped packages and private registries equivalently, maintaining separation by registry URL to avoid cross-contamination.
For offline support, npm provides the --offline flag, which enforces installation without any network access, relying exclusively on cached packages and lockfiles like package-lock.json for dependency resolution. This mode fails if required packages are absent from the cache, making it suitable for air-gapped environments or when network connectivity is unavailable. Complementarily, --prefer-offline prioritizes cache contents over remote fetches but permits network requests to supplement missing data, balancing reliability with offline resilience. In continuous integration or deployment pipelines, combining lockfiles with pre-warmed cachespopulated via prior online installsenables reproducible builds without registry dependency. These features, introduced in early npm versions and refined over time, mitigate bandwidth constraints and enhance workflow determinism, though cache corruption necessitates periodic verification to prevent installation failures.

Historical Development

Origins with Node.js (20092010)

Node.js, a JavaScript runtime built on Chrome's V8 engine, was developed by Ryan Dahl in early 2009 to enable server-side JavaScript execution with an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model. As Node.js gained initial traction, developers faced challenges in sharing and managing reusable code modules, lacking a centralized system for dependency installation and distribution.
To address this, Isaac Z. Schlueter initiated development of npm, originally standing for Node Packaged Modules, in September 2009 as an open-source project written in JavaScript. An early preview version of npm appeared on October 1, 2009, allowing basic package management for Node.js applications.
The first stable release of npm occurred on January 12, 2010, marking its integration as the default package manager for Node.js and enabling developers to install, share, and version JavaScript libraries via a command-line interface. This foundational tool facilitated the rapid growth of the Node.js ecosystem by standardizing dependency resolution and promoting modular code reuse. By the end of 2010, npm had laid the groundwork for what would become the world's largest software registry, though it remained tightly coupled with Node.js installations during this period.

Growth and Key Milestones (20112019)

npm 1.0 was released on May 1, 2011, establishing a stable foundation for package management with consistent local installations and a focus on serving as a development tool rather than a system-wide package handler. This version aligned npm closely with Node.js workflows, enabling reproducible builds and centralized dependency resolution via the emerging public registry.
By September 2014, the registry hosted approximately 94,767 packages, reflecting rapid adoption driven by Node.js's server-side expansion. npm 2.0.0 launched on September 22, 2014, introducing deterministic dependency installation through shrinkwrap files and improved handling of peer dependencies to reduce conflicts in complex projects. Weekly downloads reached about 50 million packages that year, underscoring npm's role in accelerating JavaScript ecosystem productivity.
npm 3.0 arrived in June 2015, featuring a rewritten installer for better Windows compatibility and a flatter dependency tree structure to mitigate deeply nested node_modules bloat. Growth accelerated, with the registry surpassing 100,000 packages shortly thereafter amid surging Node.js usage in web applications and microservices.
In May 2017, npm 5.0.0 delivered significant performance gains via scoped package optimizations and introduced npx for executing packages without global installation, streamlining one-off tool usage. npm 6.0 followed on April 24, 2018, adding built-in security auditing with the npm audit command to detect vulnerabilities in dependencies.
By mid-2019, the registry hit the 1 million package milestone on June 4, with weekly downloads climbing to 10.9 billion and monthly figures at 46.9 billion, evidencing npm's dominance in open-source JavaScript distribution despite occasional critiques of registry scale introducing maintenance overhead. This period's exponential growthpackages increasing over tenfold from 2014 levelsparalleled Node.js's maturation but highlighted emerging challenges like dependency bloat and security risks from unvetted uploads.

Corporate Ownership and Modern Era (2020Present)

In March 2020, GitHub announced an agreement to acquire npm, Inc., the company behind the npm package manager and registry, for an undisclosed amount. The deal, which closed on April 15, 2020, positioned npm as a subsidiary of GitHub, itself owned by Microsoft since 2018, aiming to enhance the reliability and security of JavaScript package distribution while maintaining the public registry's free access for developers. Post-acquisition, npm, Inc. continued operations independently but benefited from GitHub's resources, including improved infrastructure for handling over 2 million packages and billions of downloads weekly as of 2020.
Under GitHub's ownership, npm introduced enterprise-focused enhancements, such as advanced authentication and audit logging in paid plans, while the core CLI and public registry remained open-source and free. Key CLI updates included npm version 7 in October 2020, which automated peer dependency installations and added workspace support for monorepos, reducing common installation errors. Subsequent releasesnpm 8 in 2021 with overrides for dependency patching, npm 9 in 2022 emphasizing security scans, npm 10 in 2023 with faster caching, and npm 11 in 2026reflected a corporate emphasis on performance and vulnerability mitigation, aligning with GitHub's developer tools ecosystem like Actions for automated publishing. As of March 8, 2026, the current version of npm is 11.11.0, released on February 25, 2026.
From 2023 to 2025, npm's modern era saw deeper integrations with GitHub, including streamlined package publishing via GitHub Packages and enhanced supply chain security features like provenance attestations to verify package authenticity. In response to rising supply chain attacks, npm implemented stricter policies, such as requiring two-factor authentication for publishers and scanning for malicious code, culminating in October 2025 security updates limiting token lifetimes to 90 days maximum and restricting TOTP 2FA usage to prevent token hijacking. These changes, driven by GitHub's oversight, addressed criticisms of prior vulnerabilities but drew some developer feedback on increased friction for legacy workflows, though adoption remained high with npm retaining dominance in the JavaScript ecosystem hosting over 3 million packages by 2025.

Security Model and Vulnerabilities

Built-in Security Tools

npm incorporates the audit command as its core built-in mechanism for detecting security vulnerabilities in project dependencies. This tool submits a snapshot of the installed package tree to the npm registry, which cross-references it against a database of published security advisories to generate a report detailing affected packages, vulnerability severity (categorized as high, moderate, or low), and remediation paths through the dependency graph.
Introduced in npm version 5.5.0 on May 8, 2018, npm audit runs automatically during npm install operations (configurable via the audit flag or settings in the .npmrc configuration file like audit-level; see the Core Functionality and Features section for more details), providing immediate feedback on known issues without requiring external scanners. The report includes metadata such as Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) identifiers where available, exploitability assessments, and suggested fixes, drawing from advisories submitted by package maintainers or security researchers to the npm security team.
Complementing detection, the npm audit fix subcommand attempts automated remediation by updating vulnerable dependencies to patched versions that satisfy the project's semantic versioning constraints in package.json, preserving compatibility where possible; a --force option allows breaking updates but risks instability. Recent enhancements include audit report signatures for integrity verification, ensuring the response has not been tampered with during transit from the registry.
These tools rely on the npm registry's centralized advisory system, which as of October 2023 processes audits for millions of daily scans but is limited to disclosed vulnerabilities, potentially overlooking undisclosed or rapidly evolving threats until advisories are published. Configuration options, such as disabling audits via npm install --no-audit or customizing output with JSON formatting (npm audit --json), enable integration into CI/CD pipelines for enforced security gates.

Common Attack Vectors

One primary attack vector involves the compromise of maintainer accounts, often through phishing or credential theft, allowing attackers to publish malicious versions of legitimate packages. In September 2025, threat actors compromised accounts associated with 18 popular npm packages, including debug, chalk, and ansi-styles, injecting obfuscated payloads that enabled cryptocurrency wallet hijacking and affected over 2.6 billion weekly downloads. This method exploits npm's trust model, where verified publishers can update packages without mandatory code review, facilitating supply chain propagation to downstream dependents.
Typosquatting represents another prevalent vector, wherein attackers register packages with names resembling popular ones to deceive developers into installing malware. For instance, malicious packages mimicking typescript-eslint and @types/node were downloaded thousands of times in late 2024, delivering credential-stealing payloads. Variants include case-insensitive impersonation using lowercase letters or dependency confusion, where internal packages are overshadowed by public malicious equivalents; npm's detection blocks overt typosquats but struggles with subtle variants.
Direct publication of malicious packages targets niche audiences, such as those using Azure tools, by mimicking scoped names like @azure/* to inject backdoors or data exfiltrators. In Q1 2025 alone, Sonatype identified nearly 18,000 new malicious open-source packages across registries, with npm comprising a significant portion due to its scale.
Self-propagating worms, like the Shai-Hulud attack in September 2025, compromise packages to harvest credentials and infect others automatically, affecting over 100 npm libraries with data-stealing malware. Additional vectors include squatting on expired or unmaintained packages and injecting code via transitive dependencies, amplifying risks in unvetted dependency trees. These exploits underscore npm's vulnerability to unverified uploads, with over 70 malicious packages and extensions detected in mid-2025 stealing developer credentials and crypto assets.

Mitigation Strategies and Best Practices

To mitigate vulnerabilities in npm ecosystems, developers should prioritize built-in auditing tools to identify and remediate known security issues in dependencies. The npm audit command, available since npm version 6, scans package-lock.json against the npm security database, reporting vulnerabilities by severity, affected paths, and suggested fixes; it runs automatically during npm install but can be invoked standalone or integrated into CI/CD pipelines for ongoing monitoring. For automatic remediation, npm audit fix updates compatible dependencies to patched versions, though manual review is advised for breaking changes, and npm audit fix --force handles major version updates at potential risk to compatibility.
Enforcing reproducible installations prevents dependency drift and substitution attacks by committing package-lock.json to version control and using npm ci instead of npm install in production or CI environments, which strictly installs from the lockfile without modifications. This practice counters threats like malicious updates or typosquatting, where attackers register similar package names; npm blocks detected typosquats and encourages scoped packages (e.g., @organization/package) to namespace dependencies and reduce confusion risks.
Controlling lifecycle scripts mitigates risks from malicious post-install or pre-publish hooks in untrusted packages, which could execute arbitrary code. Install with the --ignore-scripts flag or set ignore-scripts=true in the .npmrc configuration file to disable them by default, then selectively allow trusted scripts using tools like @lavamoat/allow-scripts for an allowlist-based approach.
Account security practices are essential to prevent credential compromise enabling package hijacking. Enable two-factor authentication (2FA) via authenticator apps or security keys on npm accounts, mandatory for maintainers of high-impact packages (over 1 million weekly downloads or 500+ dependents) as of 2024, with one-time email verification for others during sensitive actions. Use read-only or scoped authentication tokens generated via npm token create instead of passwords for automation, revoking them promptly after use.
For supply chain integrity, vet packages by checking metadata with npm info, maintainer activity, download statistics, and health via npm outdated or npm doctor; minimize transitive dependencies and generate software bills of materials (SBOMs) using tools like CycloneDX for traceability. Organizations should deploy private proxies like Verdaccio for artifact governance, implement trusted publishing with OpenID Connect for short-lived credentials, and monitor for malicious content by reporting suspicious packages to npm support. These layered defenses, combined with regular dependency pruning and peer-reviewed updates, reduce exposure without eliminating inherent risks from third-party code.

Major Incidents and Controversies

left-pad Unpublishing Crisis (2016)

On March 22, 2016, developer Azer Koulu unpublished the left-pad packagea 11-line JavaScript utility for left-padding stringsfrom the npm registry, triggering widespread build failures across JavaScript projects. The package, which had been downloaded over 69,000 times in the prior week, served as a transitive dependency for thousands of modules, including major tools like Babel and React, exposing the ecosystem's reliance on unvetted, single-maintainer utilities. Fresh npm install commands failed with errors indicating the package's absence, halting automated builds and deployments for developers worldwide, as npm versions prior to 3.0 lacked robust caching to mitigate such removals.
The unpublishing stemmed from Koulu's dispute with messaging company Kik over the unrelated kik package, which Koulu had authored as a Node.js library for the Kik API; Kik invoked its trademark to claim the name, prompting npm to transfer ownership to the company per its dispute resolution policy, after which Koulu deleted over a dozen of his packages in protest. Koulu had emailed npm support expressing frustration with the decision, arguing it undermined open-source principles, though the left-pad removal was not directly tied to the kik conflict. The MIT-licensed code of left-pad permitted republishing, but the incident underscored risks in npm's model, where maintainers retain unilateral deletion rights without mandatory backups or version locks in all tools.
In response, npm CTO Laurie Voss manually republished left-pad version 0.0.3 under the npm organization's account to restore functionality, an "unprecedented" intervention justified by the package's systemic impact. npm's official statement clarified that the code was not "stolen" but openly licensed, while announcing technical and policy reforms to curb future disruptions, including restrictions on unpublishing packages published over 24 hours prior or those with significant download histories. By March 30, 2016, npm formalized these changes, prohibiting deletions of stable semantic versions to prioritize ecosystem stability over individual maintainer control.
The crisis amplified criticisms of npm's dependency culture, where trivial, forkable functions like left-padimplementable in minutespropagated through vast dependency trees, revealing single points of failure in supply chains lacking enforced redundancy or auditing. It prompted community forks, such as leftpad by npm itself, and broader adoption of lockfiles and caching in tools like npm 3+, though it did not immediately resolve underlying issues of maintainer abandonment or policy enforcement. The event, while resolved within hours, highlighted causal vulnerabilities in decentralized registries reliant on voluntary maintenance, influencing subsequent security practices like scoped packages and provenance tracking.

Malicious Dependency Injections (20182022)

In November 2018, the widely used event-stream package, a stream transformation utility downloaded millions of times, became the vector for a supply chain compromise when its original maintainer transferred control to a new developer unable to commit time to maintenance. Starting with version 4.0.0 released in August 2018, the new maintainer introduced a dependency on flatmap-stream version 0.1.1, which embedded JavaScript code designed to extract mnemonic seeds from Copay Bitcoin wallets present in the runtime environment, potentially enabling theft of cryptocurrency funds. The malicious code evaded detection for months, accumulating approximately 8 million downloads of affected versions before a developer auditing a build warning identified it on November 26, 2018; npm's security team promptly scoped and notified affected parties, leading to the package's reversion to a safe state.
This incident exemplified risks from maintainer handovers in open-source ecosystems, where unvetted successors could inject subtle dependencies without rigorous code review, as event-stream lacked formal governance or automated scanning at the time. The attack targeted a niche vulnerability in specific wallet software rather than broad exploitation, but it prompted npm to enhance auditing processes and encouraged community adoption of tools like dependency pinning and integrity checks. No widespread financial losses were publicly reported, though the episode eroded trust in transitive dependencies, with downstream projects like those using event-stream in build pipelines facing potential exposure if not updated promptly.
A similar account hijacking occurred in October 2021 with ua-parser-js, a user-agent parsing library averaging over 7 million weekly downloads for browser and device detection in web applications. Attackers compromised the maintainer's npm credentials, publishing malicious versions 0.7.29, 0.8.0, and 1.0.0 on October 22, 2021, which included obfuscated payloads to deploy a Monero cryptominer via a remote script and exfiltrate environment variables, system credentials, and network details to attacker-controlled servers. The tainted releases persisted online for roughly four hours before detection and removal by the maintainer and npm, limiting direct infections but affecting automated dependency resolution in CI/CD pipelines during that window.
The ua-parser-js breach highlighted persistent weaknesses in npm account security, such as inadequate two-factor authentication enforcement prior to npm's 2022 mandate, allowing phishing or credential stuffing to enable rapid publication of trojanized updates. Security firms noted the malware's modular design, combining immediate payload execution with data harvesting for lateral movement, though impacts were contained by swift revocation and no evidence of mass propagation beyond initial installs. This event spurred recommendations for runtime integrity verification and scoped package audits, with organizations like CISA urging pinning to verified versions and monitoring for anomalous publishes.
Between these high-profile cases, npm saw sporadic malicious injections via compromised maintainer accounts or dependency swaps, though comprehensive data on lesser incidents remains fragmented due to underreporting in decentralized repositories. For instance, isolated reports emerged of credential-targeted payloads in lesser-known packages during 20192020, often leveraging unmaintained libraries for cryptocurrency mining or reconnaissance, but none scaled to the download volumes of event-stream or ua-parser-js. These attacks collectively drove ecosystem-wide shifts toward scoped npm tokens, audit logs, and third-party scanners, revealing how reliance on unverified updates amplified risks in JavaScript's hyper-connected dependency graph.

Large-Scale Supply Chain Attacks (20232025)

In 2025, the npm ecosystem experienced two major supply chain attacks that compromised numerous packages and exposed vulnerabilities in maintainer account security and dependency propagation. The first, dubbed "s1ngularity," targeted the Nx monorepo tool in late August, exploiting GitHub Actions workflows to publish malicious versions of Nx packages. Attackers weaponized AI prompts directed at local large language models (LLMs) integrated into developer environments, tricking them into exfiltrating credentials and secrets. This incident highlighted risks from AI-assisted development tools, as the malware prompted LLMs like Gemini or Claude to bypass safeguards and steal GitHub tokens, affecting organizations using Nx for build orchestration. Nx maintainers responded by revoking compromised tokens, scanning repositories, and enhancing workflow validations, though the attack's scale was limited to Nx-specific dependencies.
The second and more widespread attack, involving the self-replicating "Shai-Hulud" worm, began on September 8, 2025, when phishing emails disguised as npm security alerts compromised maintainer accounts, including that of developer Qix for packages like chalk and debug. Attackers injected obfuscated JavaScript payloads into at least 18 popular packagessuch as chalk (used for terminal styling), debug (for logging), and ansi-styleswith these alone accounting for over 2.6 billion weekly downloads. The malware stole npm publish tokens, hijacked cryptocurrency transactions via wallet integrations, and propagated by scanning for vulnerable dependencies, ultimately compromising over 700 packages and prompting the removal of more than 500 from the registry. CISA issued an alert on September 23, 2025, urging credential rotation and pinning to pre-September 16 versions, noting the attack's potential to enable further credential theft and CI/CD pipeline infiltration.
These incidents underscored systemic issues in npm's trust model, where account takeovers via phishingoften exploiting weak 2FA or reset processesallow rapid dissemination of malicious updates without code review. Prior years (20232024) saw fewer documented large-scale compromises, though attack volumes rose significantly, with supply chain incidents increasing 742% from 2019 to 2023 per industry reports. npm responded by blocking attacker IPs, enforcing stricter token scopes, and planning mandatory multi-factor authentication enhancements, but critics noted delays in detecting propagation due to reliance on community reporting. The events affected billions of potential installations, prompting recommendations for runtime scanning, dependency locking, and avoidance of unverified maintainer privileges.

Ecosystem Impact and Criticisms

Acceleration of JavaScript Development

npm's package registry and dependency management capabilities, introduced alongside Node.js on January 12, 2010, enabled developers to install and integrate reusable modules via simple command-line operations, markedly reducing the time required to implement routine functionalities such as HTTP handling, data parsing, and authentication. This addressed prior limitations in JavaScript, where the absence of a standardized system often resulted in manual code duplication or reliance on cumbersome browser-based inclusions, slowing project initiation and iteration.
The ecosystem's expansion, reaching over 2.5 million live packages by the end of 2023 with billions of annual downloads, provided an extensive repository of vetted solutions, allowing teams to compose applications from specialized components rather than building from foundational elements. Developers reported substantial productivity gains, as packages like Express for routing or utilities such as Lodash eliminated the need to reinvent common utilities, enabling focus on domain-specific logic and accelerating prototyping cycles from weeks to days in many cases.
By promoting modular, single-responsibility packages, npm cultivated a culture of rapid contribution and refinement, where open-source maintainers iteratively improved libraries in response to community needs, further compounding development velocity. This modularity, combined with semantic versioning support, minimized integration conflicts and facilitated scalable builds, underpinning the swift adoption of frameworks like React and Vue.js that rely on npm for core dependencies.
In conjunction with Node.js, npm unified front-end and back-end workflows under JavaScript, streamlining full-stack development and reducing context-switching overhead for teams, which contributed to faster deployment pipelines and broader innovation in web-scale applications. The resulting infrastructure has sustained JavaScript's preeminence, with npm remaining the de facto standard for code distribution into 2025 despite emerging alternatives.

Dependency Bloat and Maintenance Burdens

Dependency bloat in npm ecosystems arises from the heavy reliance on modular packages, resulting in extensive transitive dependency trees that inflate project sizes far beyond direct imports. A 2023 Sonatype analysis found that typical JavaScript projects average 42 direct dependencies alongside 683 transitive ones, amplifying the total package count to often thousands per application. This proliferation contributes to node_modules directories routinely surpassing 100-700 MB even for modest projects, with installation processes extracting vast numbers of filessometimes over 100,000prolonging setup times and straining disk I/O, particularly in CI/CD pipelines or low-resource environments.
Such bloat exacerbates maintenance burdens by necessitating constant oversight of indirect dependencies, many of which developers neither control nor fully utilize. Sonatype's 2023 report indicates teams must track an average of 1,500 dependency updates annually per application, diverting significant engineering effort toward auditing, testing, and resolving compatibility issues rather than core development. Surveys like the State of JavaScript (2021-2022) identify dependency management as the foremost pain point for developers, stemming from version conflicts, breaking changes, and the administrative load of tools like npm audit for vulnerability scanning.
The security implications compound these challenges, as bloated trees expand the attack surface; an empirical study of npm's dependency network revealed that vulnerabilities in popular packages propagate to affect a median of 30 downstream releases, underscoring the risks of unmaintained transitive code. Developers face ongoing burdens in patching these exposures, often requiring overrides or forks, which introduce further custom maintenance overhead and potential divergence from upstream fixes. While npm features like overrides and resolutions mitigate some issues, the systemic dependence on external maintainersmany packages authored by individuals with limited long-term commitmentperpetuates fragility, as evidenced by frequent abandonware and the need for community-driven revivals.

Economic and Productivity Trade-offs

The extensive npm registry, hosting over 2 million packages as of 2024, enables developers to rapidly incorporate specialized modules for tasks such as data validation, HTTP routing, and utility functions, thereby reducing the time required to implement common functionalities from scratch and allowing teams to prioritize application-specific logic. This reuse model fosters modularity and specialization, contributing to faster prototyping and iteration cycles in JavaScript projects, particularly in web and server-side development.
However, this convenience introduces productivity costs through dependency bloat, where projects accumulate transitive and unused packages that inflate node_modules directories to hundreds of megabytes or more. Empirical analysis of 20,743 dependency commits across 1,487 npm-using JavaScript projects found that 55.88% of continuous integration build time tied to dependency updates stems from unused dependencies, prolonging install and test phases unnecessarily. Such overhead scales with project size, exacerbating delays in development workflows, especially in monorepos or CI/CD pipelines where repeated resolutions of large dependency graphs consume developer and computational resources.
Version conflicts and peer dependency mismatches further erode efficiency, as npm's resolution strategyprioritizing nested duplicates over deduplicationoften requires manual intervention or flags like --legacy-peer-deps, diverting hours from coding to configuration tweaks. Surveys of JavaScript developers highlight persistent frustrations with these issues, including deprecations and vulnerability management, which correlate with reduced satisfaction in package handling despite overall ecosystem growth. Maintenance burdens compound this, as teams must track technical lagmedian outdated dependencies lasting 3.5 monthsleading to compatibility breaks and refactoring efforts that offset initial gains.
Economically, while npm accelerates market entry for startups by minimizing upfront coding costs, enterprises face elevated long-term expenses from bloated bundles increasing runtime memory usage and load times, potentially degrading user experience and requiring compensatory infrastructure scaling. Studies on server-side applications underscore how bloated CommonJS dependencies hinder performance optimization, with removal efforts yielding measurable reductions in bundle sizes and startup times, though at the expense of upfront auditing labor. In aggregate, these trade-offs reveal a causal tension: npm's low-barrier reuse amplifies short-term velocity but imposes systemic drags on scalability and reliability, prompting shifts toward tools like pnpm for mitigation in resource-constrained environments.

Alternatives and Comparative Analysis

Deterministic Package Managers (Yarn, pnpm)

Yarn and pnpm address npm's historical challenges with non-deterministic dependency resolution by mandating lockfile-driven installs that yield identical node_modules structures from the same package.json and lockfile inputs, thereby enabling reproducible builds across environments and over time. This approach mitigates risks like silent version drifts or environment-specific variances that plagued early npm workflows.
Yarn, released on October 11, 2016, by an open-source collaboration including Sebastian McKenzie of Meta, pioneered widespread adoption of deterministic algorithms via its yarn.lock file, which captures exact dependency versions and checksums to prevent resolution inconsistencies. Key enhancements include parallel downloads for accelerated installsoften 2 to 5 times faster than equivalent npm operationsand built-in offline caching with integrity checks. Later versions, starting with Yarn Berry (2.0 in 2020), introduced Plug'n'Play mode to eliminate traditional node_modules folders in favor of zipped caches, further optimizing for speed and reduced disk overhead in monorepos via native workspace support.
pnpm, achieving stable version 1.0 on June 28, 2017, diverges structurally by leveraging a centralized, content-addressable global store combined with hard links or symlinks in a non-flat node_modules hierarchy, ensuring strict dependency scoping and avoiding the duplication inherent in npm's or Yarn's flat layouts. The pnpm-lock.(/page/YAML) file enforces determinism while enabling up to 2x faster installs than npm through efficient reuse of shared packages across projects, yielding substantial disk savingsparticularly in monorepos where space usage can drop by orders of magnitude compared to npm. This model also inherently blocks access to undeclared "phantom" dependencies, bolstering security and isolation beyond npm's defaults.
In benchmarks, pnpm often outperforms both npm and Yarn in cold-cache scenarios for large dependency graphs, with its symlink strategy providing finer-grained control and lower maintenance burdens in multi-package setups. While npm incorporated lockfiles (package-lock.json) in version 5 (June 2017) to achieve basic determinism, Yarn and pnpm retain edges in raw performance, storage efficiency, and monorepo ergonomics, driving their preference in high-scale JavaScript development despite npm's ecosystem dominance.

Enterprise and Monorepo Solutions

npm's workspaces feature, introduced in version 7 on October 27, 2020, enables monorepo management by defining multiple packages within a single repository via a workspaces array in the root package.json, allowing local inter-package linking and hoisting of shared dependencies to the root node_modules to minimize duplication and installation overhead. This setup supports atomic commits across projects, streamlined scripting via npm run commands that propagate to sub-packages, and efficient development workflows for teams handling interdependent modules, though it risks version conflicts in deeply nested dependency graphs without careful pinning.
In enterprise contexts, where monorepos scale to hundreds of packages and enforce compliance, npm workspaces serve as a foundational layer but often require augmentation for reproducibility, build optimization, and policy enforcement. Tools like Lerna facilitate bootstrapping, semantic versioning, and selective publishing by executing npm scripts across packages, though its core functionality has shifted toward lighter integrations since deprecating heavier features in favor of native workspaces.
For larger-scale enterprise needs, Nx extends npm workspaces with distributed task execution, computation memoization via a local cache, and plugin-based code generation, reducing build times in monorepos with thousands of files by up to 90% through incremental processing and dependency graph analysis. Microsoft's Rush, designed for JavaScript monorepos in corporate environments, imposes rigorous policies on dependency resolution and phasing to prevent drift, integrates with PNPM for content-addressable storage that cuts disk usage by avoiding redundant installs, and supports phased builds across teams, making it preferable for organizations prioritizing governance over flexibility. These solutions mitigate npm's native limitations in hoisting inconsistencies and lack of built-in caching, enabling reliable scaling while leveraging npm for core package operations.

Performance and Reliability Differences

Alternatives like Yarn and pnpm address npm's historical shortcomings in installation speed and disk efficiency through distinct architectural approaches. pnpm, for instance, employs a content-addressable store with hard links to a global package directory, enabling dependency sharing across projects and reducing redundant downloads, which results in up to 50-70% lower disk usage compared to npm's flat node_modules structure. Benchmarks demonstrate pnpm completing cold installs three times faster than npm in large projects, while Yarn leverages parallel downloads and caching to achieve speeds roughly twice that of npm in similar scenarios.
Reliability differences stem primarily from dependency resolution strategies. npm's package-lock.json, introduced in version 5 (June 2017), enforces reproducible installs but can still permit non-deterministic outcomes if lockfiles are absent or registries vary, leading to potential version drift across environments. In contrast, Yarn's yarn.lock and pnpm's pnpm-lock.yaml mandate strict, deterministic resolution by default, minimizing "works on my machine" discrepancies in team settings or CI/CD pipelines; pnpm further enhances this by isolating dependencies via symlinks, preventing access to undeclared "phantom" packages that npm and Yarn Classic may inadvertently allow. For monorepos, Yarn's native workspaces (since version 1, 2017) and pnpm's scoped hoisting provide more reliable cross-package linking than npm's post-version 7 implementation, reducing symlink breakage risks during updates.
AspectnpmYarnpnpm
Install Speed (Cold Install, Large Project)Baseline~2x faster via caching~3x faster via hard links
Disk UsageHigh (duplicated packages)Moderate (shared cache optional)Low (50-70% savings)
DeterminismImproved with lockfile, but flexibleStrict with yarn.lockStrict, enforces isolation
Enterprise solutions such as Nx or Turborepo, when paired with Yarn or pnpm, amplify these advantages by enforcing consistent caching across distributed teams, though they introduce added complexity over npm's simplicity for small-scale use. Overall, while npm has optimized performance in versions 9+ (e.g., via better caching as of November 2022), alternatives prioritize efficiency and consistency at the cost of occasional compatibility hurdles with npm-specific scripts.

References

About npm - npm Docs

npm | Home

Mastering npm & npx in 2025: The Definitive Guide to Node.js

An introduction to the npm package manager - Node.js

About npm

isaacs - GitHub

NPM & left-pad: Have We Forgotten How To Program? - David Haney

kik, left-pad, and npm

npm-install - npm Docs

Downloading and installing packages locally - npm Docs

Downloading and installing packages globally - npm Docs

npm Best Practices - RisingStack Engineering

Guide to managing npm packages in your package.json - Medium

Best Practices for Creating a Modern npm Package with Security in ...

Understanding the npm dependency model - Alexis King

Understanding npm dependency resolution | by Bhammarker Rahul

How npm3 Works | How npm Works

Understanding npm dependency resolution part 1 | by Rishav Thakur

npm Blog Archive: v5.0.0

package-lock.json | npm Docs

About semantic versioning - npm Docs

Semantic Versioning 2.0.0 | Semantic Versioning

npm-version

Updating your published package version number - npm Docs

package.json - npm Docs

npm-publish | npm Docs

Creating and publishing scoped public packages - npm Docs

package-lock.json - npm Docs

About the public npm registry

NPM registry internals - Packagecloud Blog

registry | npm Docs

New npm Registry Architecture

About scopes | npm Docs

scope | npm Docs

npm Blog Archive: 

An introduction to the npm package manager - Flavio Copes

Organizations - npm Docs

Creating an organization - npm Docs

npm-cache

folders - npm Docs

config - npm Docs

npm-ci

History of Node.js on a Timeline - RisingStack Engineering

The secret history behind the success of npm and Node

NPM Version - GeeksforGeeks

Under-the-hood of NPM - Craig Taub

npm 1.0: Released - Node.js

An abbreviated history of JavaScript package managers

NPM registry in numbers - Futurice

npm Blog Archive: npm weekly, #20: npm 3 is here(-ish)!

npm Blog Archive: Announcing npm@6

npm passes the 1 millionth package milestone! What can we learn?

npm is joining GitHub - The GitHub Blog

What's New in npm? by Darcy Clarke - GitNation

Is npm Enough? Why Startups are Coming after this JavaScript ...

npm-audit

Auditing package dependencies for security vulnerabilities - npm Docs

`npm audit`: identify and fix insecure dependencies

npm Chalk and Debug Packages Hit in Software Supply Chain Attack

lessons from the largest npm supply chain compromise | CyberScoop

npm: Threats and Mitigations

Thousands Download Malicious npm Libraries Impersonating ...

A new, stealthier type of Typosquatting attack spotted targeting NPM?

Malicious Packages in npm Targeting Azure Developers - JFrog

Nearly 18,000 New Malicious Packages Discovered in Q1 - Sonatype

Shai-Hulud npm Supply Chain Attack | Wiz Blog

Over 70 Malicious npm and VS Code Packages Found Stealing ...

NPM Security best practices - OWASP Cheat Sheet Series

How one programmer broke the internet by deleting a tiny piece of ...

How one developer just broke Node, Babel and thousands of ...

After npm JavaScript Package Fiasco, Firm Changes Policy, Says ...

Details about the event-stream incident - The npm Blog

Malicious code found in npm package event-stream downloaded 8 ...

Supply Chain Compromises Through Node.js Packages | Mandiant

Malware Discovered in Popular NPM Package, ua-parser-js - CISA

NPM Library (ua-parser-js) Hijacked | Rapid7 Blog

S1ngularity - What Happened, How We Responded, What ... - NX Dev

s1ngularity: supply chain attack leaks secrets on GitHub - Wiz

The s1ngularity attack: When attackers prompt your AI agents to do ...

Breakdown: Widespread npm Supply Chain Attack Puts Billions of ...

Widespread npm Supply Chain Attack: Breaking Down Impact ... - Wiz

"Shai-Hulud" Worm Compromises npm Ecosystem in Supply Chain ...

Our plan for a more secure npm supply chain - The GitHub Blog

Widespread Supply Chain Compromise Impacting npm Ecosystem

The "Shai-Hulud" npm Supply Chain Attack: What We Know - Reflectiz

Ongoing npm Software Supply Chain Attack Exposes New Risks

npm in Review: A 2023 Retrospective on Growth, Security, and...

Javascript And Node.js: How Open Source Fuelled The Web's ...

Why That 'Simple' npm Package Is a Ticking Time Bomb in Your ...

Web Dev Origins: The History of npm

npm in 2025: Still the Beating Heart of JavaScript Development

When to Use Node.js and Get the Most from It? - Uptech

The Real Story of npm: How It Changed JavaScript Development ...

Is it normal to have a 100K files/780 MB in the node_modules ...

Node module size: See how I reduced it by 90% | TSH.io

 Sonatype - 9th Annual State of the Software Supply Chain

State of JS 2021/2022: What Did We Learn? | Bits and Pieces

On the impact of security vulnerabilities in the npm package ...

On the Impact of Security Vulnerabilities in the npm and RubyGems ...

Initial Analysis of NPM packages at the End of the Chain - arXiv

An Empirical Study of Unused Dependencies in the npm Ecosystem

What's new in the 2025 State of JavaScript survey - DEV Community

https://arxiv.org/html/2403.17382v3

An empirical study of bloated dependencies in CommonJS packages

The Hidden Cost of NPM Dependencies How We Cut Bundle ...

Yarn: A new package manager for JavaScript - Engineering at Meta

yarnpkg/yarn: The 1.x line is frozen - features and bugfixes ... - GitHub

Yarn determinism | Yarn Blog - Yarn Classic

https://javascript.plainenglish.io/javascript-package-managers-a-concise-analysis-of-npm-yarn-pnpm-and-bun-4f4f44692b56

Home page | Yarn

pnpm version 1 is out! - Medium

Fast, disk space efficient package manager | pnpm

Why you should prefer using pnpm over npm and yarn? - Refine.dev

https://nodesource.com/blog/nodejs-package-manager-comparative-guide-2024/

npm Blog Archive: Monorepos and npm

Using `npm` Workspaces for Monorepo Management - Earthly Blog

Node.js and npm: 9 Enterprise Tips That Actually Work

Setting up Monorepo With Npm Workspaces and Lerna - Hackernoon

Top 5 Monorepo Tools for 2025 | Best Dev Workflow Tools - Aviator

NX vs Lerna vs Rush, can anyone comment on their experience ...

Rush vs Nx: A Comparison of TypeScript Monorepo Management ...

pnpm vs npm

pnpm vs npm Which one should I use in real-world projects and ...

NPM vs Yarn vs PNPM: Why so many? - DEV Community

Understanding Package Managers: pnpm vs npm vs yarn

Choosing the Right JavaScript Package Manager in 2025: npm vs ...

https://pnpm.io/benchmarks

npm cache

npm-install - npm Docs

Resolving EACCES permissions errors when installing packages globally | npm Docs

nvm - Node Version Manager

npm install CLI command

npmrc | npm Docs

npmrc | npm Docs

Try the latest stable version of npm | npm Docs

npm-windows-upgrade - npm

package-lock.json - npm Docs

Node.gitignore - GitHub gitignore Repository

package.json - npm Docs

npm CLI GitHub Repository

Configuring npm/package.json

package-lock.json

npx command

npm init | npm Docs

npm install | npm Docs

package.json | npm Docs

npx | npm Docs

npm run | npm Docs

npm ci | npm Docs

npm outdated | npm Docs

npm package.json - dependencies

npm ci command

npm fund command documentation

npm/cli Releases - v11.11.0

npm package page
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion