Null pointer Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Null pointer
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A null pointer, also known as a null reference, is a special value in computer programming that indicates a pointer variable does not currently point to any valid object, memory location, or address. It serves as a standardized way to represent the absence of a reference, allowing programmers to explicitly denote uninitialized or invalid pointers without ambiguity.
The concept originated in 1965 when British computer scientist Tony Hoare introduced null references while designing the ALGOL W programming language, primarily to simplify the implementation of a comprehensive type system for references. In a 2009 presentation, Hoare reflected on this invention as his "billion-dollar mistake," estimating that the errors, crashes, and security vulnerabilities stemming from null pointer dereferences have cost the software industry billions in development and maintenance.
In the C programming language, the null pointer constant is defined via the macro NULL, which expands to an implementation-defined null pointer constanttypically the integer literal 0 or the cast (void*)0and is available in standard headers such as <stddef.h>, <stdio.h>, and <stdlib.h>. This definition ensures that NULL can be implicitly converted to any pointer type, resulting in the null pointer value of that type, as specified in the C11 standard (ISO/IEC 9899:2011). The C23 standard (ISO/IEC 9899:2024) introduces the keyword nullptr as a null pointer constant of type nullptr_t, enhancing type safety.
The null pointer concept has been adopted across numerous programming languages with variations in syntax and behavior. In C++, nullptr (introduced in the C++11 standard) is the recommended null pointer literal, which is a prvalue of type std::nullptr_t and avoids ambiguities associated with using 0 or NULL in contexts involving function overloads or template arguments. In Java, null is a reserved literal that denotes the absence of any object reference, and attempting to dereference it throws a NullPointerException. Python uses None, a singleton object of type NoneType, to represent the lack of a value, which evaluates to False in boolean contexts and raises an AttributeError or TypeError upon certain operations.
A key risk associated with null pointers is dereferencing, where a program attempts to access memory through an uninitialized or invalid pointer, often leading to undefined behavior, segmentation faults, or program crashes. In C and C++, such dereferences are undefined by the language standards, making them a common source of bugs. To address these issues, contemporary practices include defensive programming with explicit null checks, static analysis tools, and language features like optionals (e.g., std::optional in C++17 or Optional in Java 8) that encourage safer handling of potentially absent values.

Core Concepts

Definition and Purpose

A null pointer is a special value assigned to a pointer variable, indicating that it does not refer to any valid object or function in memory. This value is distinct from all other pointer values for its type and is guaranteed not to compare equal to any pointer to an actual object or function. In standards like the C programming language, it arises from converting a null pointer constanttypically an integer constant expression with the value 0to the appropriate pointer type, resulting in a representation that points nowhere.
The primary purpose of a null pointer is to provide a safe, detectable way to represent the absence of a valid memory reference, thereby facilitating secure pointer management. It is commonly used to initialize pointer variables before they are assigned a valid address, to indicate that a resource allocation has failed (such as returning null on unsuccessful dynamic memory requests), or to signify optional or unallocated states without the risk of unintended memory access. By explicitly setting pointers to null, programmers can avoid undefined behavior that might occur with unassigned or garbage values, enabling checks that prevent erroneous operations. This mechanism supports robust program design, particularly in handling dynamic data structures where termination or absence needs to be explicitly marked.
Conceptually, a null pointer differs from other invalid pointers, such as uninitialized or dangling ones, in that it is intentionally set to a known invalid state that is reliably detectable by the program. An uninitialized pointer holds an indeterminate value that could coincidentally point to valid or invalid memory, potentially leading to unpredictable results, whereas a null pointer is explicitly defined not to point anywhere and can be tested against to ensure safety. This distinction promotes defensive programming by allowing explicit validation before dereferencing.
For a basic usage example, consider pseudocode where a pointer is declared and initialized to null to prevent undefined behavior until a valid assignment:
pointer to node p = null; // Initialize to null to indicate no valid reference
if (allocation succeeds) {
 p = allocate new node; // Assign valid address if possible
}
if (p != null) {
 // Safe to use p
 process(p);
} else {
 // Handle absence appropriately
}
This pattern ensures the pointer starts in a known safe state.

Representation in Memory

In most computing architectures, the null pointer is represented in memory as an all-zero bit pattern, corresponding to the address 0x00000000 for 32-bit pointers and 0x0000000000000000 for 64-bit pointers. This representation arises from the conversion of a null pointer constantdefined in the C standard as an integer constant expression with the value 0, or such an expression cast to type void *into the appropriate pointer type during compilation. The NULL macro, provided in standard headers such as <stddef.h>, is typically implemented as (void *)0 or simply 0, which the compiler translates into this zero-valued pointer in machine code.
This zero representation functions effectively as an invalid sentinel because, in many modern systems employing virtual memory, address 0 (or the low-memory region starting at 0) is reserved and unmapped to detect erroneous dereferences. For instance, in typical address space layouts on x86-64 or ARM architectures under operating systems like Linux, the first 64 KB (controlled by parameters such as vm.mmap_min_addr) is inaccessible to user processes, ensuring that any attempt to access it triggers a segmentation fault or similar protection mechanism. Hardware memory management units (MMUs) enforce this by marking low addresses as non-executable and non-readable, aligning with the null pointer's role as a distinguishable invalid value.
However, the null pointer's representation is implementation-defined and not universally the all-zero pattern, particularly in non-flat or segmented architectures. In x86 real mode, which uses a segmented memory model, a null pointer is often encoded as a segment selector of 0 combined with an offset of 0 (i.e., 0000:0000), which may resolve to a valid physical address rather than an invalid one, depending on the memory configuration. In embedded environments, such as certain ARM Cortex-M systems or microcontrollers like the MSP430, address 0 can map to valid flash or RAM (e.g., for vector tables), necessitating alternative trap mechanisms like memory protection units (MPUs) to guard against dereferences; in rare cases, implementations might use distinct trap values, such as all-ones bits, to represent null while preserving the standard's semantic guarantees. The C standard explicitly allows such variations, provided all null pointers compare equal and differ from valid addresses, without mandating a specific bit pattern.

Implementations in Programming Languages

Low-Level Languages: C and C++

In C, the null pointer is typically represented using the NULL macro, which is defined in the <stddef.h> header as an implementation-defined null pointer constant, commonly expanding to ((void*)0). This macro allows for a pointer-to-void casting, enabling NULL to be assigned to any pointer type without explicit casting in most contexts, as per the C standard's provisions for null pointer constants. Dereferencing a null pointer in C results in undefined behavior, as specified in the C11 standard (ISO/IEC 9899:2011, section 6.5.3.2, paragraph 4), which states that applying the unary * operator to an invalid pointer value, such as the null pointer, results in undefined behavior that may include program termination or corruption.
In C++, the NULL macro from C is retained for compatibility, but C++11 introduced the nullptr keyword as a dedicated null pointer literal of type std::nullptr_t, which can be implicitly converted to any pointer type but not to integer types, enhancing type safety over NULL. This keyword, defined in the C++11 standard (ISO/IEC 14882:2011, section 2.14.7), resolves overload resolution issues that arise with NULL or the integer literal 0, as nullptr distinguishes pointer contexts from integer ones during function overloading. For instance, nullptr prevents ambiguities in scenarios where a function is overloaded for both pointer and integer arguments, ensuring the correct overload is selected without implicit conversions that could lead to errors.
A key distinction between C and C++ lies in how null pointers are initialized: in C, the integer literal 0 serves as a null pointer constant, which can cause ambiguities in mixed integer-pointer contexts, such as conditional expressions or assignments where the compiler must resolve types implicitly. C++ addresses this with nullptr, providing a typed alternative that avoids such pitfalls and improves code clarity and safety in modern development.
The following code example illustrates a risky null dereference in C, which invokes undefined behavior:
#include <stddef.h>

int main() {
 int *ptr = NULL;
 *ptr = 42; // Undefined behavior per C11 6.5.3.2p4
 return 0;
}
In contrast, C++ encourages explicit checks using nullptr for safer handling:
#include <cstddef> // For compatibility with NULL, though nullptr is preferred

int main() {
 int *ptr = nullptr;
 if (ptr != nullptr) {
 *ptr = 42; // Safe only if check passes
 }
 return 0;
}
This approach in C++ leverages nullptr's type safety to prevent accidental integer-pointer mismatches during compilation.

High-Level Languages: Java and C#

In high-level languages such as Java and C#, null serves as the default value for uninitialized object references, representing the absence of an object allocation, while automatic memory management by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) or Common Language Runtime (CLR) abstracts away raw pointer manipulation to enhance safety. Unlike low-level languages, these environments treat references as opaque handles rather than direct memory addresses, preventing direct pointer arithmetic and reducing risks like buffer overflows, though null dereferencing still leads to runtime exceptions. This design prioritizes type safety and garbage collection, where null indicates an invalid or uninitialized reference that must be checked before use to avoid errors.
In Java, all object references are initialized to null by default unless explicitly assigned, as specified in the Java Language Specification, which states that the default value for any reference type is null. The JVM implements references as pointers to handles in some configurations, where a handle is a pair of pointers to the object's metadata and data, ensuring portability across architectures without exposing raw pointers to developers. Attempting to dereference a null reference, such as invoking a method on it, triggers a NullPointerException at runtime, an unchecked exception thrown when null is used where an object is required, including method calls, field access, or array indexing on null. For example, the following code demonstrates this behavior:
String str = null;
str.length(); // Throws NullPointerException
This exception provides stack trace details for debugging but does not allow direct memory access, relying instead on the JVM's bounds checking and verification to enforce safety.
C# mirrors Java's approach but distinguishes between value types and reference types in null handling, where reference types like classes and arrays default to null, while value types like int or bool cannot be null unless wrapped in a nullable struct (e.g., int?). The CLR manages references similarly to the JVM, using indirect pointers in its implementation to hide memory details and support garbage collection. Dereferencing a null reference in C# raises a NullReferenceException, thrown when accessing a member (e.g., property or method) on a null instance. Starting with C# 8.0, nullable reference types introduce compile-time annotations, allowing developers to mark references as nullable (e.g., string?) to enable static analysis warnings for potential null dereferences, while non-nullable references (default) assume no null assignment. For instance:
string? nullableStr = null;
nullableStr.Length; // Compile-time warning if not checked; runtime NullReferenceException if unchecked
This feature integrates with the compiler's null-state analysis to promote safer code without altering runtime behavior.
A key distinction in these languages is the emphasis on runtime exception handling over manual pointer validation, with C#'s nullable annotations providing proactive compile-time safeguards absent in standard Java, though both rely on automatic memory management to conceal underlying pointer mechanics while null remains a sentinel for uninitialized states.

Scripting and Functional Languages: Python and Others

In Python, the equivalent of a null pointer is the built-in constant None, a singleton object of type NoneType that denotes the absence of a value. Attempting to access attributes or call methods on None raises an AttributeError, such as 'NoneType' object has no attribute 'method', or a TypeError for incompatible operations like arithmetic. Developers typically check for None using the idiomatic if obj is None comparison, leveraging its singleton nature for identity checks, or isinstance(obj, NoneType) for type verification.
Python's duck typing approach prioritizes runtime behavior over static type declarations, allowing None to be assigned to variables expecting objects until misuse triggers an exception, without compile-time null enforcement. This convention-based handling encourages explicit checks before dereferencing, as in:
if obj is None:
 return "No value"
else:
 return obj.value
In JavaScript, null explicitly represents the intentional absence of an object value, distinct from undefined, which signifies an uninitialized variable or missing property. Both primitives lead to a TypeError when properties are accessed, such as null.property yielding "Cannot read property 'property' of null". This dual representation supports flexible scripting but requires careful distinction in code, often via strict equality (===) to differentiate them.
Haskell addresses null-like scenarios through the Maybe type, a monad with constructors Nothing for value absence and Just a for a wrapped value a, enabling safe propagation of potential failures without direct null dereferencing. Computations using Maybe force explicit handling via pattern matching or monadic binds (>>=), preventing runtime errors by short-circuiting on Nothing.
Rust avoids null pointers entirely by design, employing the Option<T> enum where None indicates no value and Some(t) encapsulates a value t of type T. Access requires pattern matching to distinguish cases, as with:
match opt {
 Some(val) => println!("Value: {}", val),
 None => println!("No value"),
}
Unsafe extraction via unwrap() panics on None, reinforcing compile-time encouragement of exhaustive handling over unchecked nulls.

Dereferencing Risks

Null Dereferencing Mechanics

When a program attempts to dereference a null pointer, it performs an operation that interprets the pointer's valuetypically 0as a valid memory address and tries to read from or write to that location. In low-level languages like C, this occurs through syntax such as *ptr where ptr holds the value NULL (defined as 0), leading to an invalid memory access attempt at address 0. This behavior is classified as undefined by the C standard, but in practice, it consistently results in a runtime error due to hardware and operating system protections.
At the low level, modern operating systems protect the memory page containing address 0 to prevent accidental or malicious access, ensuring that any attempt to dereference a null pointer triggers an exception. On Unix-like systems, this manifests as a segmentation fault via the SIGSEGV signal, which is generated when a process attempts an invalid memory reference, such as accessing unmapped or protected pages. Similarly, on Windows, dereferencing a null pointer raises an access violation structured exception with code 0xC0000005, indicating an attempt to read, write, or execute at an invalid address. These mechanisms rely on the CPU's memory management unit (MMU) to detect the fault, often through paging where address 0 resides in an inaccessible page.
Diagnostic tools provide insight into null dereferences by capturing the state at the time of the fault. Operating systems may produce a core dumpa snapshot of the program's memory and registersor a stack trace showing the execution path. The GNU Debugger (GDB) can analyze such artifacts; for instance, loading a core dump with gdb (/page/Executable) core allows commands like backtrace to display the call stack and info registers to reveal the faulting instruction, often pinpointing the null pointer value and the dereference site.
Consider an example in x86 assembly, where dereferencing a null pointer might compile to an instruction like mov eax, , which loads the value at memory address 0 into the EAX register. This triggers a general-protection exception (#GP) or page-fault exception (#PF) on Intel processors, as address 0 is typically reserved and protected in protected mode, halting execution and invoking the OS exception handler.
; Hypothetical x86 assembly snippet
mov eax, 0 ; Load null into register (ptr = NULL)
mov ebx, ; Dereference: attempt to load from , causes #GP(0) or #PF
This low-level trap ensures immediate termination or handler invocation, preventing further corruption.

Error Consequences and Examples

Dereferencing a null pointer typically results in immediate program termination through a segmentation fault or equivalent exception, leading to crashes that disrupt service availability. In more severe cases, such mishandling can cause data corruption by writing to unintended memory locations or allowing unchecked access that overflows buffers. These errors often stem from unhandled edge cases, such as race conditions or initialization failures, amplifying their impact in multi-threaded or distributed systems.
The introduction of null references has been famously critiqued by their inventor, Tony Hoare, who in 2009 described them as his "billion-dollar mistake" due to the widespread economic costs from debugging and failures they have induced across software development. A prominent real-world example occurred on June 12, 2025, when a null pointer exception in Google Cloud Platform's Service Control component, triggered by corrupted policy data containing blank fields, caused widespread crashes across multiple services, resulting in a multi-hour global outage affecting millions of users and dependent applications like Spotify and Discord.
From a security perspective, null dereferences frequently enable denial-of-service attacks by forcing repeated crashes, but they can also escalate to more dangerous exploits if the fault bypasses safety checks, potentially allowing arbitrary code execution or privilege escalation in kernel or driver code. For instance, certain null dereference vulnerabilities in the Linux kernel have been exploited to achieve code execution by leveraging adjacent memory mappings or error handling paths that provide controlled access to sensitive regions. Such issues highlight how null mishandling can chain into buffer overflows when length checks are evaded, exposing confidential data or enabling remote code injection.
Null dereferences remain a prevalent cause of software instability, consistently ranking among the top common weaknesses in vulnerability databases and contributing significantly to segmentation faults in production environments, as evidenced by analyses of bug reports and crash logs in large-scale systems.

Prevention Strategies

Language Built-in Protections

Many programming languages incorporate built-in mechanisms at the language or runtime level to detect or mitigate null pointer issues, reducing the risk of undefined behavior or crashes. In managed environments like the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and the Common Language Runtime (CLR), automatic null checks are performed before critical operations such as method dispatch on object references. For instance, the JVM explicitly verifies that the object reference (this) is non-null during virtual method invocation via the invokevirtual instruction; if null, it throws a NullPointerException immediately, preventing further execution on invalid memory. Similarly, in the CLR, attempting to invoke an instance method on a null reference triggers a NullReferenceException, as the runtime detects access to a member on an uninitialized object reference.
High-level languages also leverage type systems for enhanced null safety. Java's NullPointerException serves as a runtime sentinel, explicitly signaling attempts to dereference null where an object is expected, such as calling an instance method on a null reference. In C++, the introduction of nullptr in C++11 provides a distinct type (std::nullptr_t) for the null pointer literal, enabling stricter type checking during compilation and avoiding ambiguities with integer literals like NULL (which is typically defined as 0). This prevents errors in function overload resolution or pointer arithmetic where an integer might be implicitly converted. Rust enforces null safety at compile time through its Option enum, which explicitly represents optional values as either Some(T) or None; non-Option types are guaranteed non-null by the borrow checker, eliminating runtime null dereferences in safe code.
Scripting languages have adopted syntactic sugar for safer navigation. JavaScript's optional chaining operator (?.) , introduced in ECMAScript 2020, allows property access or method calls that short-circuit to undefined if the base value is null or undefined, avoiding TypeError exceptions from dereferencing null.
Standards evolution continues to address null handling in low-level languages. The C23 standard (ISO/IEC 9899:2024) introduces the nullptr keyword as a predefined null pointer constant of type nullptr_t, improving type safety over prior macros like NULL by preventing unintended integer conversions in pointer contexts. As of 2023 drafts, ongoing WG14 proposals explored nullability annotations (e.g., _Nullable and _Nonnull qualifiers) for compile-time checks, though these were deferred beyond C23; related efforts like N3422 propose an _Optional qualifier for future revisions to annotate potentially null pointers explicitly.
These protections introduce trade-offs between safety and efficiency. Runtime null checks in managed languages like Java can contribute to execution overhead, though optimizations like check elimination mitigate this in hot paths. In performance-critical applications, such checks may impose a measurable slowdown compared to unchecked native execution, but they yield substantial safety gains by averting crashes and enabling predictable error handling.

Best Practices and Tools

Developers can mitigate null pointer issues by adopting disciplined coding practices that emphasize initialization, validation, and safer abstractions. One fundamental practice is to always initialize pointers to null upon declaration, such as int *ptr = nullptr;, which prevents dereferencing uninitialized memory and makes intent explicit. Before dereferencing any pointer, perform defensive checks like if (ptr != nullptr) to ensure validity, avoiding undefined behavior that could lead to crashes or security vulnerabilities. In C++, preferring smart pointers such as std::unique_ptr over raw pointers enforces exclusive ownership and automatic cleanup, reducing the risk of null dereferences by encapsulating validity checks and lifetime management.
Coding standards further reinforce these habits through structured guidelines and runtime aids. The Google C++ Style Guide mandates using nullptr instead of NULL or 0 for null indicators to enhance type safety and recommends documenting pointer nullability in function comments, ensuring developers explicitly address potential null states. Incorporating assertions in debug builds, such as assert(ptr != nullptr);, provides immediate feedback on violated assumptions without impacting release performance, aligning with practices in standards like SEI CERT for early error detection. After freeing memory with free() or delete, setting the pointer to null, e.g., ptr = nullptr;, prevents accidental reuse of dangling pointers, a recommendation echoed in embedded systems coding norms.
Tools play a crucial role in automating null pointer detection during development and testing. Static analyzers like the Clang Static Analyzer scan code paths to identify potential null dereferences before compilation, flagging issues such as unchecked returns from allocation functions. Coverity Static Analysis similarly detects null pointer defects by modeling data flow, including cases where pointers may be null at dereference sites, and has been used to uncover vulnerabilities in large codebases. For runtime verification, dynamic tools like Valgrind's Memcheck instrument code to track memory accesses, reporting invalid reads or writes at address 0x0 as null pointer dereferences, enabling precise debugging of elusive bugs.
Modern approaches shift focus from reactive checks to proactive design that minimizes null usage altogether. Design by contract incorporates preconditions, such as requiring non-null inputs via assertions or exceptions, to enforce interface obligations and treat null violations as programmer errors rather than runtime failures. Immutable data structures, by design, often eliminate the need for nulls through value-based semantics or optional types, as seen in functional programming paradigms where objects cannot mutate to invalid states, thereby reducing dereference risks across the codebase.

Historical Evolution

Origins in Early Languages

The concept of the null pointer traces its origins to the mid-20th century, building on early pointer mechanisms in programming languages. Pointer concepts first appeared in the 1950s with the development of Lisp, where the symbol NIL served as a representation for the empty list and effectively functioned as a null value to denote absence or termination in linked structures. Similarly, Fortran's evolution in the 1950s introduced indirect addressing techniques that laid groundwork for pointer-like operations, though without explicit null handling.
The explicit invention of the null reference is credited to Tony Hoare in 1965 while designing ALGOL W at Queen Mary College, London. Hoare introduced it to support optional parameters in a type-safe manner, allowing references to indicate the absence of an object without requiring additional flag variables. This innovation was influenced by ALGOL 60's reference model but extended it with a dedicated null value for simplicity.
Early implementations followed soon after. In the 1960s, PL/I, developed jointly by IBM and other vendors starting in 1964, incorporated null pointers to represent uninitialized or invalid pointer states, using a built-in NULL() function to generate the value and enabling checks for pointer validity. By 1972, Dennis Ritchie adopted null pointers in the C language while implementing the Unix operating system at Bell Labs, defining NULL as the integer constant 0 converted to a pointer type, which provided a standardized way to signal non-pointing states in system code.
The rationale for null pointers centered on efficiently addressing the "missing value" problem in data structures and parameters, avoiding the overhead of extra storage for presence indicators like boolean flags. This made implementations straightforward, particularly in resource-constrained environments, but it simultaneously introduced the risk of dereferencing invalid references, leading to runtime errors if not checked.
Prior to null's formalization, early computing relied on ad-hoc alternatives such as special sentinel values or explicit error codes to denote invalid or missing pointers. In assembly languages of the 1950s and 1960s, programmers often used reserved addresses like all-ones (e.g., 0xFFFFFFFF on certain architectures) as sentinels for uninitialized pointers, or returned error codes from subroutines to signal failure, requiring manual checks to avoid invalid memory access. For instance, on IBM 704 assembly, indirect addressing might employ a fixed invalid location as a terminator, mimicking null behavior without a dedicated construct.

Key Developments and Incidents

One significant advancement in addressing null pointer ambiguities occurred in C++, where the nullptr keyword was proposed in 2003 by Bjarne Stroustrup as a distinct type for null pointer constants, distinguishing it from integer zero and preventing type mismatches in function overloads. This proposal evolved through revisions, including a 2007 update, and was formalized in the C++11 standard released in 2011, enabling safer pointer initialization and comparisons across pointer types.
In parallel, Java's introduction of null references in 1995, alongside its garbage collection mechanism, marked a shift toward managed memory environments where null dereferences remained a runtime risk but memory leaks from dangling pointers were mitigated. The language's design emphasized automatic memory reclamation, yet NullPointerException became one of the most common runtime errors, highlighting the trade-offs in null handling.
Rust, initiated in 2006 and reaching version 1.0 in 2015, fundamentally eliminated null pointers from its core design by 2010 through the use of the Option<T> enum, enforcing explicit handling of absence via pattern matching or safe unwrapping at compile time. This approach prevents null dereference errors without runtime overhead, prioritizing memory safety in systems programming.
As of 2025, languages like Swift, with its optional types introduced in 2014 and refined through annotations by 2017, and Kotlin, featuring platform null safety since its 2011 inception and widespread Android adoption by 2016, have seen broad uptake for compile-time null checks. Recent studies highlight null pointer issues in AI-generated code, with a 2024 analysis finding that 62.07% of programs produced by large language models contain vulnerabilities, including frequent null dereferences due to inadequate handling in synthesized logic.
The enduring impact of null references was poignantly acknowledged by Tony Hoare in his 2009 QCon presentation, where he apologized for inventing them in 1965, dubbing it his "billion-dollar mistake" for enabling widespread errors in modern software. This reflection spurred efforts toward null-safe designs, exemplified by Ceylon's 2012 launch with union types and compile-time null enforcement, though development ceased in 2020 after donation to the Eclipse Foundation in 2017.

References

https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/types/NULL

NULL(3const) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Null References: The Billion Dollar Mistake - InfoQ

Object (Java Platform SE 8 )

Built-in Constants

Question 5.1 - C FAQ

 Nick Stoughton 1. Null Pointer Issues The POSIX committee n

None

Why is address zero used for the null pointer? - c++ - Stack Overflow

msp430 | Re: C, NULL and 0 clarified (hopefully)

NULL pointer protection with ARM Cortex-M MPU - Quantum Leaps

Standard library header <stddef.h> - cppreference.com

<stddef.h>

Prohibit zero and NULL from being used as null pointer literals

Built-in Exceptions Python 3.14.0 documentation

Built-in Functions Python 3.14.0 documentation

Glossary Python 3.14.0 documentation

null - JavaScript - MDN Web Docs

Data.Maybe - Hackage - Haskell.org

Option in std - Rust Documentation

signal(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Access Violation C0000005 - Microsoft Learn

CWE-476: NULL Pointer Dereference (4.18) - MITRE Corporation

Google Cloud Outage Analysis: June 12, 2025 - ThousandEyes

Exploiting null-dereferences in the Linux kernel - Google Project Zero

 What IF Is Not Enough? Fixing Null Pointer Dereference ... - USENIX

NullReferenceException Class (System) - Microsoft Learn

NullPointerException (Java SE 17 & JDK 17) - Oracle Help Center

Defining an Enum - The Rust Programming Language

Optional chaining (?.) - JavaScript - MDN Web Docs - Mozilla

 Proposal for C2y WG14 N3422 Title: _Optional - Open Standards

Effective Null Pointer Check Elimination Utilizing Hardware Trap

 Proceedings of the Java Virtual Machine Research and ... - USENIX

Best practices to safely navigate pointers in C/C++ - Embedded

EXP34-C. Do not dereference null pointers - Confluence

Google C++ Style Guide

Smart Pointer Guidelines - The Chromium Projects

None

4. Memcheck: a memory error detector - Valgrind

Preconditions Part I | Andrzej's C++ blog - WordPress.com

Objects Should Be Immutable - Yegor Bugayenko

 History of Lisp - John McCarthy

Early LISP history (1956 - 1959) - ACM Digital Library

 PL/I (F) - Bitsavers.org

The Development of the C Language - Nokia

The history of the NULL pointer - Retrocomputing Stack Exchange

 A name for the null pointer: nullptr - Bjarne Stroustrup

 A name for the null pointer: nullptr (revision 4) 1. The Problem, and ...

Learn What A Null Pointer Constant (nullptr) Is In Modern C++

Null Pointer Exception in Java - GeeksforGeeks

Rust Programming Language Tutorial (Basics), Part 2 - Apriorit

Mars Climate Orbiter Team Finds Likely Cause of Loss

Designating Nullability in Objective-C APIs - Apple Developer

https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2025/11/growing-kotlin-adoption-in-your-company/

(PDF) How secure is AI-generated code: a large-scale comparison ...

The Ceylon compiler, language module, and command line tools
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion