NVLink Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
NVLink
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 NVLink is a high-speed, point-to-point interconnect technology developed by NVIDIA for direct communication between GPUs and between GPUs and CPUs, enabling scalable multi-processor systems with bandwidths far exceeding traditional PCIe interfaces. Introduced in 2016 to address bottlenecks in high-performance computing (HPC) and artificial intelligence (AI) workloads, it supports bidirectional data transfer rates up to 1.8 TB/s per GPU in its fifth generation, facilitating efficient memory sharing and computation across up to 576 GPUs in large-scale configurations.
The technology has evolved through multiple generations, each doubling or more the bandwidth while improving energy efficiency. The first generation, launched with the Pascal-based P100 GPU, provided initial high-speed links for dual-GPU setups; subsequent versions with Volta (V100), Ampere (A100 at 600 GB/s per GPU), and Hopper (H100 at 900 GB/s per GPU) expanded scalability for supercomputing and AI training. The fifth-generation NVLink, integrated into the Blackwell architecture (B200 GPUs), achieves 1.8 TB/s bidirectional throughput via 18 connections per GPU at 100 GB/s each, offering 14x the bandwidth and 5x the energy efficiency of PCIe Gen5, with NVLink achieving 1.3 pJ/bit. Complementary technologies like NVSwitch enable all-to-all GPU communication in systems such as the 8-GPU HGX H100, reducing latency for tasks like large language model inference by up to 1.5x in throughput.
NVLink powers key applications in AI factories, supercomputers, and data centers, including real-time inference for trillion-parameter models (e.g., 30x faster in GB200 NVL72 systems) and simulations for drug discovery and climate modeling on platforms like Summit and Sierra. Recent advancements, such as NVLink-C2C for chip-to-chip integration and NVLink Fusion announced in May 2025, allow semi-custom AI infrastructure by connecting third-party silicon to NVIDIA GPUs at up to 800 Gb/s, partnering with companies like MediaTek and Marvell to build efficient, rack-scale AI solutions. In October 2025, NVIDIA expanded the NVLink Fusion ecosystem with Samsung Foundry and introduced NVQLink for quantum-GPU integration; November updates enabled multi-node NVLink on Kubernetes for GB200 systems. These features make NVLink essential for maximizing throughput in power-constrained environments, supporting up to 25.6 Tbps aggregate bandwidth per NVSwitch chip.

Introduction

Definition and Purpose

NVLink is a multi-lane, point-to-point communications link developed by NVIDIA to enable high-speed data transfer between GPUs and between GPUs and CPUs in accelerated computing environments. It utilizes the NVHS (NVIDIA High-Speed) signaling protocol, a proprietary wire-based serial interconnect designed for low-latency, high-bandwidth connections.
The technology was first announced on March 25, 2014, alongside NVIDIA's Pascal GPU architecture, marking a shift toward more integrated processor ecosystems.
NVLink's core purpose is to accelerate data-intensive workloads in artificial intelligence, high-performance computing, and data center applications by facilitating direct GPU-to-GPU and GPU-to-CPU communication, thereby bypassing CPU processing bottlenecks and the shared-bus limitations of traditional PCIe interconnects. This direct linkage enhances overall system throughput, allowing processors to exchange data more efficiently without the overhead of routing through a central CPU or contended bus.
At its foundation, NVLink incorporates mesh networking topology concepts, enabling scalable GPU clusters where multiple devices interconnect in a distributed, non-hierarchical fashion to support large-scale parallel processing.

Key Advantages

NVLink provides superior bandwidth and lower latency compared to PCIe, facilitating faster data transfer in multi-GPU configurations essential for accelerating AI model training workloads.
In the context of large language model (LLM) inference and training, NVLink's high-bandwidth interconnect is particularly beneficial for frequent inter-GPU data transfers in multi-GPU setups, enabling efficient scaling that PCIe cannot match. For instance, NVLink with NVSwitch can provide up to 900 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth per GPU, compared to PCIe Gen5's maximum of 128 GB/s per link. However, while select high-end consumer GPUs like the GeForce RTX 3090 support NVLink via bridges, its absence in other RTX 30 series models and the entire RTX 40 and 50 series forces reliance on PCIe, which may be further constrained by reduced lanes (e.g., x4 in some configurations), limiting performance scaling in LLM workloads.
This interconnect supports coherent memory sharing across GPUs, allowing direct access to pooled memory resources without the need for explicit data copying, which significantly reduces overhead in distributed computing tasks.
By employing direct GPU-to-GPU links, NVLink enhances energy efficiency, consuming less power per bit transferred than PCIe-based systems, thereby minimizing overall power usage in large-scale AI clusters.
Additionally, NVLink's integration with NVSwitch enables flexible topologies, such as full-mesh connections supporting up to 576 GPUs in a non-blocking fabric, promoting scalable performance for expansive multi-GPU systems.

Technical Architecture

Protocol and Topology

NVLink employs the NVIDIA High-Speed Signaling (NVHS) protocol, a proprietary interconnect designed for high-bandwidth, low-latency communication between GPUs and other devices. The protocol is packet-based, utilizing variable-length packets composed of 1 to 18 flits, where each flit is 128 bits wide, transmitted at frequencies such as 1.25 GHz in early implementations. Error detection is achieved through a 25-bit Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) per packet, capable of identifying up to five random bit errors or a 25-bit burst error, with error correction handled via retransmission from a replay buffer in the Data Link Layer. Flow control is managed by the Data Link Layer, incorporating synchronization mechanisms and virtual channels to ensure reliable, ordered delivery without packet loss, while the Transaction Layer handles higher-level operations like address routing and coherence transactions.
The protocol supports flexible network topologies to accommodate multi-GPU systems, including point-to-point connections for direct device-to-device links, ring configurations for sequential GPU chaining, and mesh topologies such as the hybrid cube-mesh used in eight-GPU clusters to optimize collective communication patterns. These topologies enable scalable interconnects within servers, with NVSwitch components extending mesh connectivity across larger GPU domains for all-to-all communication without bottlenecks. In advanced systems, such as those using NVIDIA's GB200 architecture, the topology integrates multiple NVLink switches to form a single-layer, non-blocking fabric connecting up to 72 GPUs.
Link aggregation in NVLink combines multiple sub-links, each consisting of differential signaling pairs (typically eight lanes per direction in initial generations), to achieve higher aggregate bandwidth. Modern GPUs, like the NVIDIA Blackwell series, support up to 18 NVLink connections per device, allowing bidirectional aggregation for total throughputs exceeding 1.8 TB/s in full configurations. This aggregation is managed at the protocol level, where lanes operate in parallel to form wider effective links, enhancing fault tolerance through lane-level error handling and load balancing across paths.
NVLink implements a cache-coherent interconnect model, enabling unified memory access across connected GPUs and CPUs through hardware-managed coherence protocols. This allows atomic operations, such as compare-and-swap, directly on remote device memory without software intervention, ensuring data consistency in shared address spaces. The coherency extends to support for NVIDIA's Unified Memory system, where pages can migrate transparently between devices, facilitating seamless data sharing in multi-GPU workloads like deep learning training.

Physical Layer and Signaling

NVLink employs a physical layer based on high-speed differential signaling to enable low-latency, high-bandwidth communication between GPUs and supporting components. The interface utilizes differential pairs over copper traces for intra-node connections, providing robust noise immunity and signal integrity in dense server environments. In advanced configurations, such as NVLink Network extensions, optical transceivers support longer-distance links up to 20 meters, using multimode or single-mode fiber to extend connectivity beyond traditional copper limitations while maintaining compatibility with the core signaling protocol.
The signaling scheme evolves across generations, starting with non-return-to-zero (NRZ) modulation in early implementations and transitioning to pulse amplitude modulation with four levels (PAM4) in higher generations to achieve greater spectral efficiency. Differential pairs operate at data rates ranging from 20 GT/s in initial versions to 100 GT/s in recent ones, where each lane transmits serialized data with embedded clock recovery to minimize skew and jitter. Encoding techniques, such as 8b/10b in foundational designs, ensure DC balance and reliable transmission over the copper medium, with polarity inversion and lane reversal features enhancing flexibility in board routing.
Connector standards for NVLink are proprietary to NVIDIA, featuring high-density ports directly integrated into GPUs and bridges for direct mating without intermediate cables in compact systems. These ports use multi-pin arrays, such as 400-pin high-speed connectors, to accommodate multiple sub-links simultaneously. For external or switch-based setups, standardized form factors like OSFP (Octal Small Form-factor Pluggable) cages house up to four NVLink connections, supporting both copper direct-attach cables for short reaches and optical modules for extended scalability.
Power and thermal management are critical for NVLink deployments, particularly in multi-GPU configurations where aggregate link budgets can contribute significantly to overall system consumption. Each link's power draw scales with data rates and lane count, typically requiring efficient DC-DC conversion on the GPU die to maintain signal integrity without excessive heat generation. In dense racks, advanced cooling solutions like liquid immersion or high-velocity airflows are essential to dissipate the thermal load from active signaling, preventing throttling and ensuring sustained performance; for instance, OSFP connectors incorporate integrated heatsinks rated for up to 17W per module to handle optical variants.

Generations and Specifications

Version Evolution

NVLink began as a high-speed interconnect primarily for linking pairs of GPUs via bridges, evolving into a scalable fabric capable of interconnecting hundreds of GPUs through advanced switching technologies. This progression has been driven by the need for greater bandwidth and connectivity in AI, high-performance computing (HPC), and data center applications, with each generation introducing higher signaling rates, more links per GPU, and architectural enhancements for larger-scale systems.
The first generation, NVLink 1.0, debuted in 2016 alongside NVIDIA's Pascal GP100 GPU, such as in the Tesla P100. It operated at a signaling rate of 20 GT/s per lane, delivering 160 GB/s of bidirectional bandwidth across four NVLink connections per GPU, enabling direct GPU-to-GPU communication that was approximately five times faster than PCIe 3.0 x16. Initially implemented via physical bridges for dual-GPU configurations in workstations and servers like the DGX-1, this version focused on low-latency memory access between peers without requiring system memory involvement.
NVLink 2.0 arrived in 2017 with the Volta V100 GPU, increasing the signaling rate to 25 GT/s and providing 300 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth through six links per GPU, a near doubling of per-link throughput compared to the prior generation. This version introduced the NVSwitch, a dedicated chip that enabled all-to-all connectivity among up to eight GPUs in systems like the DGX-1, marking the shift from simple point-to-point bridges to a more expansive switched fabric for improved scalability in multi-GPU training workloads.
In 2020, NVLink 3.0 launched with the Ampere A100 GPU, doubling the signaling rate to 50 GT/s per signal pair and achieving 600 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth via 12 links per GPU, with each link offering 25 GB/s in each direction. These enhancements supported larger-scale AI training by improving data transfer efficiency for tensor operations and multi-node configurations, integrating seamlessly with second-generation NVSwitches to connect up to 16 GPUs at full bandwidth.
NVLink 4.0, introduced in 2022 with the Hopper H100 GPU, maintained the 50 GT/s base rate but incorporated optimizations like PAM-4 signaling to reach 100 Gb/s effective throughput per lane, resulting in 900 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth across 18 links per GPU. Paired with the third-generation NVSwitch, it facilitated denser interconnects in HGX platforms, supporting up to 256 GPUs in a single domain for accelerated HPC and AI inference tasks.
The latest iteration, NVLink 5.0, emerged in 2024 with the Blackwell B100 and B200 GPUs, utilizing 100 GT/s PAM-4 signaling for 1.8 TB/s bidirectional bandwidth through 18 links per GPU, effectively doubling the previous generation's capacity. As of November 2025, this version remains current, with Blackwell GPUs generally available since early 2025. It extends fabric scalability to support up to 576 GPUs via advanced NVSwitch systems, enabling massive AI factories for trillion-parameter model training and real-time inference.
Key evolutionary shifts in NVLink include the transition from dual-GPU bridges in early generations to full-mesh fabric architectures enabled by NVSwitches, allowing seamless scaling from small clusters to rack-scale and beyond while preserving high-bandwidth, low-latency communication.

Performance Metrics

NVLink's performance is characterized by its high bandwidth, low latency, and efficient scalability, which are critical for accelerating multi-GPU workloads in high-performance computing and AI applications. The total bidirectional bandwidth is calculated as total bidirectional bandwidth (GB/s) = (number of links) (bandwidth per link in GB/s), where per-link bandwidth derives from signaling rate, modulation, lane count, and encoding (e.g., for NVLink 5.0, 100 GB/s per link bidirectional). This yields aggregate GPU bandwidths up to 1.8 TB/s.
Latency in NVLink is low, enabling GPU-to-GPU data transfers of approximately 2 s, which is about 10x faster than the ~20 s typical for equivalent operations over PCIe due to reduced protocol overhead and direct interconnect topology. This low latency supports efficient synchronization in parallel computing tasks, minimizing stalls in data-intensive applications.
Scalability metrics highlight NVLink's ability to handle large-scale GPU clusters; for instance, the fifth-generation achieves up to 100 GB/s per link, facilitating aggregate bandwidths that enable up to 2x faster multi-GPU collective operations in NCCL benchmarks compared to PCIe-based systems.
InterconnectAggregate Bandwidth (Bidirectional)
NVLink 5.0 (per GPU, 18 links)1.8 TB/s
PCIe Gen5 (x16)128 GB/s
PCIe Gen6 (x16)256 GB/s
Efficiency factors include NVLink's direct GPU-to-GPU paths, which eliminate CPU involvement and reduce overhead, achieving higher effective throughput in AI workloads. This results in near-linear scaling for bandwidth-bound operations like model parallelism in large language models.

Hardware Implementations

GPU and System Integration

NVLink integration begins with the Pascal architecture's GP100 GPU, which incorporates four NVLink ports to enable high-bandwidth GPU-to-GPU communication. This design allows for direct interconnects in early multi-GPU configurations, providing up to 160 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth aggregate.
Subsequent architectures expanded NVLink port counts for greater scalability. The Volta GV100 GPU in Tesla V100 accelerators features six NVLink ports, delivering 300 GB/s total bidirectional bandwidth per GPU. The Ampere GA100 in A100 GPUs increases this to twelve ports, achieving 600 GB/s bandwidth, while the Hopper GH100 in H100 GPUs supports eighteen ports for 900 GB/s. The Blackwell B200 maintains eighteen ports, supporting fifth-generation NVLink at 1,800 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth per GPU. These ports are typically integrated on-board in server-grade SXM modules, with some configurations exposing external ports for additional connectivity via compatible hardware, though the total port count limits overall links.
In contrast to these professional-grade implementations, most consumer-grade NVIDIA GeForce RTX series GPUs lack native NVLink support. For instance, while the RTX 3090 in the 30 series supports NVLink via external bridges, other models in the RTX 30 series, as well as the entire RTX 40 and 50 series, do not incorporate NVLink ports and rely instead on PCIe interconnects. This absence poses limitations for multi-GPU setups in large language model (LLM) tasks, where frequent inter-GPU data transfers are common. PCIe, even at Gen5 speeds offering up to 128 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth, provides significantly lower throughput compared to NVLink's up to 1,800 GB/s in recent generations, and configurations with reduced lanes (e.g., x4) further constrain scalability and efficiency. Professional GPUs like the A100 and H100, with their extensive NVLink capabilities, enable far superior scaling for such AI workloads, highlighting the gap between consumer and enterprise hardware.
In system-level designs, NVLink facilitates dense GPU clustering, as seen in the DGX-1 server, which embeds eight V100 GPUs interconnected via their six NVLink ports each in a hybrid cube-mesh topology for optimized deep learning performance. This on-board integration reduces latency and boosts multi-GPU efficiency without relying on PCIe bottlenecks.
NVLink extends to heterogeneous computing through NVLink-C2C, a chip-to-chip variant that coherently connects Arm-based NVIDIA Grace CPUs to GPUs. In the Grace CPU Superchip, two Grace CPUs link via NVLink-C2C at 900 GB/s, enabling unified memory access across 144 Arm Neoverse V2 cores. Similarly, the Grace Hopper Superchip pairs a Grace CPU with an H100 GPU over NVLink-C2C, allowing seamless CPU-GPU memory sharing for accelerated AI and HPC workloads. This integration supports oversubscription of GPU memory with CPU resources, enhancing system-wide coherence in diverse compute environments.

Bridge and Switch Configurations

NVLink bridges provide external connectivity for direct GPU-to-GPU data transfer in systems using PCIe-based GPUs, enabling memory pooling and workload scaling without relying on the host CPU or PCIe bus. These bridges typically consist of short copper interconnects designed for dual-GPU setups, supporting configurations such as 2-slot, 3-slot, or 4-slot spans to fit various chassis designs. For instance, in the NVIDIA V100 GPU based on the Volta architecture, a single NVLink bridge utilizes six links to deliver a total bidirectional bandwidth of 300 GB/s between two GPUs. Similarly, for Ampere-based GPUs like the GeForce RTX 3090, a plug-in NVLink bridge achieves 112.5 GB/s of bidirectional bandwidth, facilitating enhanced performance in consumer and professional workstations.
In server environments, NVLink bridges extend to SXM form factor modules, where they connect multiple GPUs within a single node, such as in NVIDIA HGX platforms, allowing for seamless integration in rack-mounted systems without external cabling beyond the module. However, these copper-based bridges are constrained by signal integrity requirements, limiting effective distances to approximately 30 cm to minimize attenuation and maintain high-speed data rates.
For larger-scale expansions, NVSwitch devices serve as high-performance fabric switches that interconnect dozens of GPUs, creating a non-blocking all-to-all topology for cluster-level communication. The first-generation NVSwitch, paired with Volta GPUs, features 18 NVLink ports and delivers 900 GB/s of aggregate bidirectional bandwidth, enabling configurations like the 16-GPU DGX-2 system. Subsequent generations scale accordingly; the third-generation NVSwitch, aligned with Hopper architecture, supports 64 ports at 50 GB/s each for 3.2 TB/s full-duplex bandwidth per switch. In the latest fifth-generation NVSwitch for Blackwell GPUs, each unit provides 144 ports with 14.4 TB/s switching capacity, supporting massive domains of up to 576 GPUs in liquid-cooled racks like the GB200 NVL72. NVSwitches are typically deployed in server trays or dedicated chassis, drawing up to 75 W per unit under typical loads, which influences overall system power budgeting and cooling designs.

Software and Programming

APIs and Libraries

NVLink integration within the CUDA programming model primarily occurs through the runtime API, enabling developers to query and utilize high-bandwidth GPU-to-GPU connections without explicit topology management. The cudaDeviceCanAccessPeer function allows applications to determine if direct peer-to-peer (P2P) memory access is supported between two devices, which returns true for NVLink-connected GPUs, facilitating efficient data sharing. This API is essential for optimizing multi-GPU workloads, as NVLink provides significantly higher bandwidth than PCIe for such accesses. Once confirmed, cudaDeviceEnablePeerAccess activates P2P capabilities, allowing kernels on one GPU to directly read or write memory on another without host intervention.
For data transfers, CUDA provides cudaMemcpyPeer and cudaMemcpyPeerAsync functions to copy memory directly between device address spaces over NVLink, supporting both synchronous and asynchronous operations that overlap with computation. These APIs transparently route traffic through NVLink when available, improving performance in bandwidth-bound scenarios. Developers can query NVLink-specific capabilities indirectly through device attributes, such as the number of NVLink bridges via cudaDeviceGetAttribute with cudaDevAttrNumNvLinkBridges, though detailed link topology is often handled by system tools.
The NVIDIA Collective Communications Library (NCCL) builds on CUDA to provide optimized communication primitives that leverage NVLink topology for multi-GPU collectives. NCCL implements operations like all-reduce, broadcast, and all-gather, automatically selecting NVLink paths for intra-node GPU communication to minimize latency and maximize throughput. For instance, in distributed training, NCCL's ring or tree algorithms route data along NVLink-connected peers, achieving near-peak bandwidth utilization. As of November 2025, NCCL 2.28 introduces a Device API that fuses communication primitives with compute kernels, enhancing performance over NVLink by reducing latency in collective operations. This library integrates seamlessly with CUDA, requiring only communicator initialization via ncclCommInitAll before invoking collectives like ncclAllReduce.
Unified Memory in CUDA further simplifies NVLink utilization by enabling a single managed address space across GPUs and the host, where NVLink accelerates page migrations and access faults between devices. Allocated via cudaMallocManaged, this memory allows transparent GPU-GPU sharing without explicit P2P setup, as the CUDA driver handles migrations over NVLink for coherence. In NVLink-equipped systems, this reduces overhead in irregular data access patterns, such as graph analytics, by prefetching data with cudaMemPrefetchAsync to the accessing GPU.
To illustrate, the following code snippet detects NVLink-enabled peers and enables P2P access:
#include <cuda_runtime.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
 int num_devices;
 cudaGetDeviceCount(&num_devices);
 for (int i = 0; i < num_devices; i++) {
 cudaSetDevice(i);
 for (int j = 0; j < num_devices; j++) {
 if (i == j) continue;
 int can_access;
 cudaDeviceCanAccessPeer(&can_access, i, j);
 if (can_access) {
 cudaDeviceEnablePeerAccess(j, 0);
 printf("Device %d can access device %d via NVLink or P2P.\n", i, j);
 }
 }
 }
 return 0;
}
This example queries all device pairs and enables access where supported, typically indicating NVLink connectivity.
For bandwidth-limited transfers, a simple P2P copy can be implemented as follows:
#include <cuda_runtime.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
 const int size = 1024 * 1024 * sizeof(float); // 4MB
 float *d_src, *d_dst;
 cudaSetDevice(0); cudaMalloc(&d_src, size);
 cudaSetDevice(1); cudaMalloc(&d_dst, size);
 // Assume P2P enabled
 cudaMemcpyPeerAsync(d_dst, 1, d_src, 0, size, cudaStreamDefault);
 cudaDeviceSynchronize();
 cudaFree(d_src); cudaFree(d_dst);
 return 0;
}
Here, cudaMemcpyPeerAsync performs an asynchronous transfer over NVLink from device 0 to 1, allowing overlap with other operations.

Management Tools

The NVIDIA Management Library (NVML) provides a C-based API for programmatic monitoring and management of NVLink connections on supported GPUs, enabling administrators to query link status and retrieve error reports. Key functions include nvmlDeviceGetNvLinkState, which determines if a specific NVLink is active or inactive, returning an nvmlEnableState_t value such as NVML_FEATURE_ENABLED or NVML_FEATURE_DISABLED. For error reporting, nvmlDeviceGetNvLinkErrorCounter fetches counters for issues like data link replay errors, cyclic redundancy check (CRC) errors, and recovery events, helping isolate faults in multi-GPU fabrics; this function supports Pascal and newer architectures but support has been removed on Blackwell GPUs. Utilization monitoring is available via nvmlDeviceGetNvLinkUtilizationCounter, which measures transmit and receive data rates in bytes (though deprecated since CUDA 13.0 in favor of field-based queries), and counters can be reset with nvmlDeviceResetNvLinkErrorCounters for ongoing diagnostics. These capabilities require NVML initialization and appropriate permissions, making NVML essential for automated health checks in NVLink-enabled systems.
The nvidia-smi command-line interface (CLI) extends its GPU management features to NVLink through dedicated subcommands, allowing users to monitor utilization, discover fabric topology, and perform fault isolation without custom programming. The nvidia-smi nvlink --status command displays the state of all NVLinks (active, inactive, or sleep) and their connected peers, facilitating quick verification of interconnect integrity across GPUs. For utilization, nvidia-smi nvlink -g <gpu_id> reports throughput metrics like transmit and receive bandwidth, while fabric discovery is supported via nvidia-smi nvlink --info to enumerate link details and capabilities. Fault isolation uses nvidia-smi nvlink --errorcounters to view aggregated error types such as replays and CRCs per link, with nvidia-smi nvlink --reseterrorcounters clearing them post-analysis; these operations require administrator privileges on supported drivers. Overall, nvidia-smi serves as a versatile, non-intrusive tool for real-time NVLink oversight in both single-node and cluster environments.
The Data Center GPU Manager (DCGM) offers enterprise-grade diagnostics for NVLink health in large-scale clusters, integrating telemetry and proactive monitoring to ensure reliable interconnect performance. DCGM's diagnostic suite includes tests that validate NVLink integration by checking error counters across links, detecting issues like uncorrectable errors or persistent faults that could degrade fabric bandwidth. Telemetry features enable ongoing bandwidth usage tracking via field identifiers such as NVML_FI_DEV_NVLINK_THROUGHPUT_TX and NVML_FI_DEV_NVLINK_THROUGHPUT_RX, providing aggregated metrics for cluster-wide analysis and alerting on anomalies. In multi-node setups, DCGM supports NVLink-specific run levels in its diagnostics, skipping tests if links are disabled while flagging integration problems, and it accounts for multiple error types to isolate root causes without disrupting operations. This makes DCGM particularly suited for data center deployments, where it runs as a policy-driven service for continuous NVLink supervision.
Configuration utilities for NVLink primarily involve system-level settings to enable or disable links, often accessed through BIOS interfaces or software panels for initial setup and maintenance. In server BIOS, options such as "Above 4G Decoding" or NVLink-specific toggles must be enabled to activate full interconnect functionality, as seen in DGX systems where disabling certain features like Block SID can impact link initialization. These tools ensure NVLink operates at intended widths (e.g., x4 or x12 per link) but require physical bridges or switches and compatible hardware, with changes typically necessitating a system reboot.

History and Adoption

Development Milestones

NVIDIA first announced NVLink at the GPU Technology Conference (GTC) in March 2014, introducing it as a high-speed GPU interconnect designed to enable tighter integration between GPUs and future architectures like Pascal, paving the way for exascale computing by addressing PCIe bottlenecks.
In April 2016, NVIDIA released the first implementation of NVLink 1.0 with the Tesla P100 GPU based on the Pascal architecture, allowing up to eight GPUs to interconnect within a single node for enhanced performance in deep learning and high-performance computing applications.
The following year, at GTC 2017 in May, NVIDIA unveiled NVLink 2.0 alongside the Volta-based Tesla V100 GPU, doubling the bandwidth per link to support more efficient multi-GPU scaling; this era also saw the introduction of NVSwitch technology to enable full all-to-all connectivity among multiple GPUs, as demonstrated in subsequent systems like the DGX-2.
From 2020 to 2022, during the Ampere and Hopper eras, NVIDIA advanced NVLink to its third and fourth generations: NVLink 3.0 debuted with the A100 GPU in 2020, providing 600 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth per GPU to accelerate AI training and inference, while NVLink 4.0 arrived with the H100 GPU in 2022, offering up to 900 GB/s per GPU and supporting exascale systems through improved scalability for massive GPU clusters.
In March 2024, at GTC, NVIDIA revealed NVLink 5.0 integrated with the Blackwell architecture, delivering 1.8 TB/s bidirectional bandwidth per GPU and enabling connectivity for up to 576 GPUs in a single domain to meet the demands of next-generation AI factories.
In May 2025, NVIDIA announced NVLink Fusion at Computex, a new technology that allows third-party chipmakers to integrate NVLink connectivity into their custom silicon, enabling semi-custom AI infrastructure with up to 800 Gb/s bandwidth between NVIDIA GPUs and partner ASICs or CPUs. Partnerships include MediaTek, Marvell, Alchip, Astera Labs, and Synopsys, facilitating efficient rack-scale AI solutions.
Throughout NVLink's development, NVIDIA collaborated closely with IBM, particularly integrating NVLink with the POWER9 processor starting in 2017 to enable high-bandwidth CPU-GPU communication, as seen in systems like the Summit supercomputer for advancing AI and HPC workloads.

Major Deployments

NVLink has been pivotal in enabling high-performance computing in landmark supercomputers, notably the Summit and Sierra systems deployed in 2018. Summit, hosted at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, integrates NVLink 2.0 to connect IBM POWER9 CPUs with NVIDIA V100 GPUs across its nodes, delivering a peak performance of 200 petaFLOPS and facilitating advanced simulations in fields like climate modeling and drug discovery. Similarly, Sierra at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory employs the same NVLink 2.0 architecture with POWER9 and V100 configurations, achieving approximately 125 petaFLOPS and supporting nuclear stockpile stewardship and astrophysics research through seamless GPU-to-GPU data transfer.
In AI platforms, NVLink powers NVIDIA's DGX systems, which are optimized for training large language models. The DGX A100, featuring eight A100 GPUs interconnected via third-generation NVLink at 600 GB/s bidirectional bandwidth, forms a unified 8-GPU domain that accelerates multi-trillion-parameter model training by minimizing data movement bottlenecks. The successor DGX H100 extends this with fourth-generation NVLink, providing 900 GB/s bandwidth across eight H100 GPUs, enabling efficient scaling for generative AI workloads in enterprise environments.
Cloud providers have integrated NVLink into GPU instances to support scalable AI and HPC in data centers. AWS offers NVLink-enabled EC2 instances like the P4d series with A100 GPUs and the newer P6e-GB200 UltraServers using fifth-generation NVLink for up to 72 Blackwell GPUs in a single domain, delivering 360 petaFLOPS of FP8 compute for distributed training. Azure's ND series, such as NDv2 with V100 NVLink and ND-H100 v5 with H100 NVLink 4.0, provide high-bandwidth intra-VM connectivity, while the GB300 NVL72 clusters leverage NVLink 5 for 130 TB/s all-to-all bandwidth across 72 GPUs, powering large-scale AI inference and training.
These deployments underscore NVLink's role in advancing toward exascale computing, where its high-bandwidth interconnects have contributed to pre-exascale systems like Summit and Sierra, paving the way for broader AI scaling despite varying architectures in projects like Frontier. NVLink 5.0 has driven next-generation clusters deployed in 2025, enabling rack-scale AI supercomputing with up to 1.8 TB/s per GPU for trillion-parameter models and beyond.

References

What Is NVLink? - NVIDIA Blog

NVLink & NVSwitch: Fastest HPC Data Center Platform | NVIDIA

NVIDIA NVLink and NVIDIA NVSwitch Supercharge Large ...

NVIDIA Unveils NVLink Fusion for Industry to Build Semi-Custom AI ...

NVLink Takes GPU Acceleration To The Next Level

NVLink: Faster Interconnects and Switches to Help Relieve Data ...

NVIDIA Launches World's First High-Speed GPU Interconnect ...

NVIDIA DGX-1: The Fastest Deep Learning System

How NVLink Will Enable Faster, Easier Multi-GPU Computing

Accelerate Large-Scale LLM Inference and KV Cache Offload with ...

NVLink-C2C | Chip Interconnect Technology - NVIDIA

 Pascal Architecture Whitepaper | NVIDIA Tesla P100

NVIDIA GB200 Interconnect Architecture Analysis-NVLink ...

NVLink - Blocks and Files

 NVIDIA DGX-1 with Tesla V100 System Architecture White paper

None

 NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU Architecture

 NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU Architecture

 NVIDIA LinkX Cables and Transceivers Guide to Key Technologies

Power and Thermals NVIDIA GB200 NVL Multi-Node Tuning Guide

 NVIDIA TESLA V100 GPU ARCHITECTURE

 NVIDIA DGX-1 System Architecture White paper

NVIDIA Tesla V100

NVIDIA Ampere Architecture In-Depth | NVIDIA Technical Blog

NVIDIA Hopper Architecture In-Depth | NVIDIA Technical Blog

NVIDIA GB200 NVL72 Delivers Trillion-Parameter LLM Training and ...

Introduction - NVIDIA Docs Hub

https://www.fibermall.com/blog/nvidia-nvlink.htm

Scaling AI Inference Performance and Flexibility with NVIDIA NVLink ...

PCI Express 6.0 Specification

None

NVIDIA Grace CPU Superchip

NVIDIA Grace Hopper Superchip Architecture In-Depth

NVLink High-Speed GPU Interconnect | NVIDIA Quadro

NVIDIA HGX Platform

 NVIDIA NVSwitch: The World's Highest-Bandwidth On-Node Switch

Specifications - NVIDIA Docs

https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#peer-to-peer-memory-access

https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__MEMORY.html

CUDA Device properties - NVIDIA Docs

Overview of NCCL NCCL 2.28.6 documentation - NVIDIA Docs

Collective Operations NCCL 2.28.6 documentation - NVIDIA Docs

https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#unified-memory-programming

https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__MEMORY.html#group__CUDART__MEMORY_1g55f5c9f5890df54d8bb155b8d6a2c43a

 NVML - NVIDIA Docs Hub

Nvidia-smi Manual

DCGM Diagnostics - NVIDIA Docs

Feature Overview NVIDIA DCGM Documentation latest ...

 NVIDIA DGX OS 7 User Guide

To verify that NVIDIA SLI is enabled and working

NVIDIA Delivers Massive Performance Leap for Deep Learning ...

NVIDIA GTC 2017 Keynote: Key Points and the NVIDIA Tesla V100 ...

NVIDIA Boosts World's Leading Deep Learning Computing Platform ...

H100 GPU - NVIDIA

NVIDIA Blackwell Platform Arrives to Power a New Era of Computing

With IBM POWER9, we're all riding the AI wave - IBM Newsroom

Summit - Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility

Summit GPU Supercomputer Enables Smarter Science

Lawrence Livermore Unveils Sierra, World's Third Fastest ...

Siting Sierra: Lawrence Livermore's newest and fastest ...

 NVIDIA DGX A100 | The Universal System for AI Infrastructure

DGX H100: AI for Enterprise - NVIDIA

What is NVIDIA DGX H100? - WEKA

New Amazon EC2 P6e-GB200 UltraServers accelerated by NVIDIA ...

 How to select Amazon EC2 GPU instances for deep learning

NDv2 size series - Azure Virtual Machines | Microsoft Learn

ND-H100-v5 size series - Azure Virtual Machines | Microsoft Learn

NVIDIA GB300 NVL72: Next-generation AI infrastructure at scale

Nvidia Licenses NVLink Memory Ports To CPU And Accelerator ...

Microsoft Azure Unveils World's First NVIDIA GB300 NVL72 ...

Project Ceiba Largest AI Super Computer Co-Built with NVIDIA

AORUS GeForce RTX NVLINK BRIDGE FOR 30 SERIES

GeForce RTX 5090 Graphics Cards - NVIDIA

Scaling AI Inference Performance and Flexibility with NVIDIA NVLink and NVLink Fusion

NVLink vs PCIe: What's the Difference for AI Workloads

NVIDIA NVLink and NVIDIA NVSwitch Supercharge Large Language Model Inference

Scaling AI Inference Performance and Flexibility with NVIDIA NVLink and NVLink Fusion

NVLink port support for RTX 3090 Ti, RTX 4080/4090
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion