OpenSSH Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
OpenSSH
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 OpenSSH is an open-source implementation of the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol suite, providing secure remote login, command execution, and file transfer capabilities over unsecured networks by encrypting all communication to prevent eavesdropping, connection hijacking, and other attacks. Developed in 1999 by the OpenBSD Project as a licensing-clean alternative to earlier free SSH code, it originated from a fork of Bjrn Grnvall's OSSH project and was rapidly advanced by key contributors including Theo de Raadt, Markus Friedl, Niels Provos, and others to support the OpenBSD 2.6 release in December 1999. The suite comprises essential components such as the ssh client for initiating secure connections, the sshd daemon for hosting SSH servers, scp for secure file copying, and sftp for interactive file transfers, all built atop the SSH-2 protocol standardized by the IETF. OpenSSH emphasizes security through features like strong authentication methods (including public-key cryptography), secure tunneling for port forwarding, and configurable options for access control, while its portable version extends compatibility to numerous non-OpenBSD platforms including Linux, Windows, macOS, and various Unix-like systems. Maintained by a small team of OpenBSD developers under a BSD-style license, it has become the de facto standard for secure remote access, with the latest release, version 10.2, issued on October 10, 2025, incorporating bug fixes for ControlPersist usability and PKCS#11 key handling alongside ongoing portability enhancements.

Introduction

Overview

OpenSSH is an open-source suite of networking utilities based on the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol, specifically implementing version 2.0 to facilitate secure remote login, file transfer, and command execution across unsecured networks. Developed under a BSD-style license, it encrypts all communication to ensure confidentiality and integrity, serving as the de facto standard for secure remote access in modern computing environments.
The core purpose of OpenSSH is to replace vulnerable legacy protocols like telnet, rlogin, and rcp, which transmit data in plaintext and are susceptible to eavesdropping, tampering, and man-in-the-middle attacks. By providing robust encryption and authentication mechanisms, OpenSSH enables administrators and users to manage systems remotely without compromising security, a critical need in distributed and cloud-based infrastructures.
OpenSSH enjoys widespread adoption, installed by default on most Unix-like operating systems, including major Linux distributions such as Ubuntu and Red Hat Enterprise Linux, macOS, and BSD variants like FreeBSD. For Windows, it is available through official portable releases and integrated as an optional feature since Windows 10 version 1809. This ubiquity stems from its emergence in 1999, when OpenBSD developers forked the last free version of the original SSH software to address the licensing restrictions imposed by its proprietary successors in the late 1990s.

Components

OpenSSH is composed of a suite of tools and binaries designed to implement the SSH protocol for secure remote operations, with client-side, server-side, and auxiliary components that work together to enable encrypted communications and key management.

Client-side tools

The primary client-side tools facilitate remote access and file transfer over secure channels. The ssh client is a program for logging into a remote machine and executing commands on it, providing secure encrypted communications between untrusted hosts over an insecure network. The scp command copies files between hosts on a network in a secure manner, using the SFTP protocol over an SSH connection to ensure the same level of authentication and security as an SSH login session. Similarly, the sftp client is a secure interactive file transfer program that operates over an encrypted SSH transport, supporting features like public key authentication for transferring files between local and remote systems.

Server-side tools

On the server side, the sshd daemon provides the core service for handling incoming SSH connections, listening for clients and forking new processes to manage each session, including key exchange, authentication, and data transfer.

Auxiliary tools

Auxiliary tools support key generation, management, and authentication processes integral to the suite's operation. The ssh-keygen utility generates, manages, and converts authentication keys for SSH protocol version 2, creating public-private key pairs such as Ed25519 by default and allowing passphrase protection for private keys. The ssh-agent authentication agent holds private keys used for public key authentication, allowing users to avoid repeatedly entering passphrases during multiple SSH sessions by securely storing and forwarding authentication requests. Complementing this, ssh-add adds private key identities to the authentication agent, loading default keys from the user's ~/.ssh directory or specified files and prompting for passphrases as needed. Additionally, ssh-keyscan gathers public host keys from remote servers to help build and verify known host files, using non-blocking I/O to efficiently collect keys from multiple hosts without requiring login access.

Configuration files

Configuration is centralized through dedicated files that govern the behavior of the tools. The ssh_config file customizes client-side settings for connections, authentication, and forwarding, with user-specific options in ~/.ssh/config and system-wide defaults in /etc/ssh/ssh_config. On the server, sshd_config defines daemon parameters for authentication, security, and session handling, typically located at /etc/ssh/sshd_config and readable by all users while writable only by root.
The modular design of these components allows them to interact seamlessly via the SSH protocol, enabling advanced functionalities such as port forwarding and tunneling, where the ssh client can create secure channels for other applications or services. These tools collectively support authentication methods like public key authentication, with auxiliary components handling key-related tasks to maintain security across operations.

History and Development

Origins

OpenSSH was founded in 1999 by Theo de Raadt and members of the OpenBSD project team, including Aaron Campbell, Bob Beck, Markus Friedl, Niels Provos, and Dug Song, as an open-source reimplementation of the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol. The project originated as a fork of OSSH, a bug-fixed version of Tatu Ylnen's original free SSH 1.2.12 release from 1998, which had been revived earlier that year by Bjrn Grnvall. Prior to OpenSSH, Ylnen had developed SSH in 1995 at Helsinki University of Technology to address password-sniffing vulnerabilities on his university network, releasing the initial protocol and software as free but later commercializing it through SSH Communications Security, which imposed restrictive licensing.
The primary motivations for creating OpenSSH were to establish a freely auditable codebase free from proprietary restrictions, enabling rigorous security reviews aligned with OpenBSD's emphasis on proactive security and code correctness. This effort was spurred by Ylnen's shift to commercial licensing, which limited community access and auditing of the increasingly popular SSH software, prompting the OpenBSD team to clean up and enhance the last free version for long-term maintainability. The initial source code was committed to the OpenBSD repository on September 26, 1999, marking the project's official start.
The first portable release, OpenSSH 1.0, emerged in October 1999, providing an early multi-platform version based on the SSH 1.2.12 codebase but with immediate additions for SSH-2 protocol support to improve security. This was followed by integration into OpenBSD 2.6 as version 1.2.2 on December 1, 1999. Early development faced challenges including patent concerns over RSA encryption, which influenced the rapid adoption of SSH-2 alternatives like Diffie-Hellman key exchange, and U.S. cryptographic export restrictions that complicated international distribution of strong encryption tools during the late 1990s.

Evolution and Key Releases

OpenSSH's evolution has been marked by a steady progression toward enhanced security and protocol standardization, beginning with its initial focus on replacing insecure remote access tools. By 2000, the project achieved full compliance with the SSH-2 protocol, a significant milestone introduced in version 2.1.0p1 released on May 9, 2000, which provided robust encryption and authentication mechanisms superior to the vulnerable SSH-1. This transition culminated in version 3.0 on November 6, 2001, where SSH-2 became the default protocol, reflecting the developers' commitment to phasing out legacy insecurities. A pivotal advancement occurred in 2002 with OpenSSH 3.3, released on June 21, which enabled privilege separation by defaulta design that isolates untrusted processes to limit potential exploit damagebuilding on preliminary implementations from earlier versions like 3.2 in May 2002. Further reinforcing this security posture, OpenSSH disabled SSH-1 support by default in version 5.4p1 on March 8, 2010, and fully removed it in version 7.6 on October 3, 2017, accelerating the ecosystem's shift away from the protocol's known weaknesses.
The development model centers on the OpenBSD operating system, where core OpenSSH is crafted with an emphasis on simplicity, auditability, and security, typically aligning with OpenBSD's biannual release cycle to incorporate rigorous code reviews and testing. Since its inception in 1999, a distinct "portable" version has been maintained separately by a volunteer community to adapt the codebase for other Unix-like and non-OpenBSD platforms, ensuring broad accessibility while preserving the original's security principles. This dual-track approach involves periodic synchronization between the OpenBSD trunk and portable branch, with the latter marked by 'p' suffixes in version numbers (e.g., 10.2p1) to denote portability-specific adjustments. The process relies on comprehensive code audits conducted by the OpenBSD team, a bug bounty program that incentivizes vulnerability discovery through monetary rewards, and funding from donations to support ongoing maintenance without commercial dependencies.
In recent years, OpenSSH has continued to prioritize cryptographic modernization and vulnerability remediation. Version 9.0, released on April 8, 2022, switched the scp tool to use SFTP by default for improved security. Additionally, ssh-keygen began generating Ed25519 keys by default in version 9.5 on October 4, 2023, due to their efficiency and resistance to certain attacks. Addressing emerging threats, OpenSSH 9.9p2, issued on February 18, 2025, incorporated fixes for critical CVEs including CVE-2025-26465 (a man-in-the-middle vulnerability) and CVE-2025-26466 (a pre-authentication denial-of-service issue), affecting versions from 6.8p1 onward. Most recently, OpenSSH 10.2, released on October 10, 2025, resolved key bugs in the ControlPersist feature for multiplexed connections and PKCS#11 key handling; DSA key support was fully removed in version 10.0 on April 9, 2025, following earlier disablement by default in version 7.0 in 2015. These updates underscore the project's adaptive response to evolving security landscapes through targeted enhancements rather than wholesale overhauls.

Technical Features

Protocols and Algorithms

OpenSSH implements the Secure Shell version 2 (SSH-2) protocol as its primary transport mechanism, standardized in RFC 4251 through RFC 4254, which define the architecture, authentication, transport layer, and connection protocols, respectively. SSH-2 became the default protocol in OpenSSH starting with version 2.9 in 2001, providing enhanced security over the original SSH-1 through improved key exchange, integrity protection, and resistance to known vulnerabilities. Support for the insecure SSH-1 protocol, which lacked proper protection against insertion attacks and used weaker cryptography, was deprecated following the publication of SSH-2 standards in 2006, with a build-time option to remove it added in version 6.5 (2014); sshd disabled it by default in version 7.8 (2018), and it was fully expunged in later versions. OpenSSH also supports protocol extensions such as the Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), integrated as a subsystem within the SSH-2 connection protocol per RFC 4254.
For key exchange, OpenSSH employs Diffie-Hellman (DH) methods, including group exchange as specified in RFC 4419, to establish shared session keys securely between client and server. It supports elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) variants, such as ecdh-sha2-nistp256, ecdh-sha2-nistp384, and ecdh-sha2-nistp521, introduced in version 5.7 (2011) per RFC 5656 for efficient key agreement using NIST curves. Additionally, Curve25519-based exchanges like , added in version 6.5 (2014); standardized in RFC 8731 (2020), provide high-speed, secure key derivation with resistance to certain side-channel attacks. Recent versions, such as OpenSSH 10.0 (2025), prioritize hybrid post-quantum key exchanges like mlkem768x25519-sha256 by defaultintroduced earlier in 9.0 (2022) with sntrup761x25519-sha512while disabling legacy finite-field DH groups for improved security. Version 10.2 (October 2025) added related portability fixes.
Symmetric encryption in OpenSSH relies on authenticated encryption modes to protect session data confidentiality and integrity. Preferred ciphers include AES variants in Galois/Counter Mode (GCM), such as and , added in version 6.2 (2013) per RFC 5647, and Counter (CTR) mode like aes128-ctr and aes256-ctr per RFC 4344. The ChaCha20-Poly1305 authenticated encryption mode, introduced in version 6.5 (2014) via draft-ietf-secsh-chacha20-poly1305, serves as the default cipher since version 6.9 (2015) due to its performance on resource-constrained devices and resistance to timing attacks. Older ciphers like 3DES (3des-cbc) were removed from default configurations in OpenSSH 8.0 (2020) to mitigate vulnerabilities in triple-DES, such as meet-in-the-middle attacks.
Message authentication in OpenSSH uses hash-based message authentication codes (HMACs) and other primitives to ensure data integrity during transmission. It supports HMAC-SHA2 algorithms, including hmac-sha2-256 and hmac-sha2-512, added in version 5.9 (2011) per RFC 6668, which provide stronger collision resistance than earlier SHA-1 variants. For AEAD ciphers like ChaCha20-Poly1305 and AES-GCM, Poly1305 serves as the integrated authenticator, as defined in their respective specifications, eliminating the need for separate MACs while maintaining 128-bit security. Legacy MACs, such as those based on MD5 or truncated SHA-1, were disabled by default in version 7.0 (2015) to prevent exploitation of weak hash functions. Encrypt-then-MAC (EtM) constructions, like , are preferred in modern configurations to enhance security against certain padding oracle attacks.
Compression in OpenSSH is optional and implemented using the zlib library for deflate-based reduction of bandwidth usage, supporting methods like "zlib" and the delayed "" variant introduced in version 4.2 (2005) to mitigate risks from pre-authentication compression attacks like CRIME. By default, compression is disabled in both client and server since early versions to prioritize security and avoid potential vulnerabilities in compressed data handling, though it can be enabled explicitly for high-latency links. Pre-authentication compression support was fully removed in sshd version 7.4 (2016).

Authentication and Key Management

OpenSSH supports multiple authentication methods to verify user and host identities securely over the network. The preferred method is public-key authentication, where a client proves its identity using a cryptographic key pair without transmitting sensitive data like passwords. In this process, the client's private key remains local, while the corresponding public key is stored on the server for verification. Other methods include password authentication, which prompts the user for a plaintext password sent encrypted over the channel; keyboard-interactive authentication, which allows the server to issue challenges such as one-time passwords; and host-based authentication, which relies on trusted host files like /etc/hosts.equiv combined with public key verification of the client host.
For enhanced security, OpenSSH integrates with Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM) to enable multi-factor authentication (MFA) through keyboard-interactive methods, allowing systems to combine public keys or passwords with additional factors like hardware tokens or biometrics provided by PAM modules. This integration is configured via the KbdInteractiveAuthentication directive in sshd_config, specifying pam as the device, and supports standards like U2F/FIDO for two-factor challenges passed through PAM environment variables.
Key management in OpenSSH begins with key pair generation using the ssh-keygen utility, which creates private and public keys in standard formats, typically storing the private key in ~/.ssh/id_<type> (e.g., id_ed25519) protected by a passphrase and the public key in a corresponding .pub file. The public key is then distributed to the target server and appended to the user's ~/.ssh/authorized_keys file, which lists authorized public keys in a specific format for server-side verification during login attempts. Host key verification ensures the server's identity by checking its public key against the client's ~/.ssh/known_hosts file or /etc/ssh/ssh_known_hosts, preventing man-in-the-middle attacks by alerting users to unknown or changed keys.
The ssh-agent daemon facilitates seamless key handling by securely storing unlocked private keys in memory, eliminating repeated passphrase entry across multiple sessions or hosts. Keys are added to the agent using ssh-add, and the agent authenticates on behalf of the user via environment variables like SSH_AUTH_SOCK. Agent forwarding, enabled with the -A option in ssh, extends this capability over SSH connections, allowing keys to be used on remote systems without direct exposure, but it includes security restrictions such as prohibiting remote loading of PKCS#11 or FIDO libraries by default to mitigate risks like key misuse if the remote host is compromised.
Privilege separation, introduced in OpenSSH 3.2.2 (2002) and enabled by default since then, enhances security by forking the sshd daemon into multiple processes with distinct privilege levels: a privileged monitor process oversees authentication, while unprivileged child processes handle potentially vulnerable operations like input processing. This isolation limits the impact of authentication failures or exploits, as bugs in untrusted code cannot escalate to full system compromise, a design formalized in early implementations to contain privilege escalation risks.
For enterprise-scale deployments, OpenSSH supports SSH certificates signed by a trusted certificate authority (CA), enabling centralized key management without distributing individual public keys to every server. Certificates embed a public key, user identity, principals, and constraints like validity periods or command restrictions, generated via ssh-keygen -s with the CA's private key; servers verify them by trusting the CA's public key in sshd_config via TrustedUserCAKeys. This approach scales efficiently for large organizations by revoking certificates centrally rather than managing per-user keys.

Supported Key Types

OpenSSH supports a variety of asymmetric cryptographic key types for both host authentication and public key-based user authentication, enabling secure key exchange and signature verification within the SSH protocol. The primary types include RSA, ECDSA, and Ed25519, along with specialized security key (sk) variants for hardware-backed authentication. These are configured via options like PubkeyAcceptedAlgorithms in sshd_config, which lists acceptable signature algorithms by default as ssh-ed25519, ecdsa-sha2-nistp256, ecdsa-sha2-nistp384, ecdsa-sha2-nistp521, , , rsa-sha2-512, and rsa-sha2-256 (plus certificate variants).
RSA keys remain one of the most widely supported options in OpenSSH, utilizing the RSA algorithm with SHA-256 or SHA-512 signatures for compatibility with legacy systems. They are suitable for both host and user keys, providing robust backward compatibility in mixed environments. OpenSSH recommends generating RSA keys with at least 2048 bits for adequate security, though the default size for new keys is 3072 bits to align with current cryptographic standards.
ECDSA keys employ the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm over NIST P-256, P-384, and P-521 curves, supporting fixed key sizes of 256, 384, and 521 bits respectively. This allows for smaller key sizes than RSA while delivering equivalent or higher security levels, making ECDSA efficient for resource-constrained systems. The 256-bit variant (ecdsa-sha2-nistp256) is commonly used due to its balance of performance and security.
Ed25519 keys, based on the Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm, feature a fixed 256-bit key size and have served as the default for ssh-keygen since OpenSSH 6.5, released in January 2014. They offer strong resistance to side-channel attacks and are optimized for high-speed operations, combining compact keys with performance superior to traditional elliptic curve methods. Ed25519 is recommended for new deployments due to its modern design and broad compatibility.
The DSA key type (ssh-dss), limited to 1024-bit keys, was deprecated in OpenSSH due to its vulnerability to certain attacks and insufficient security margins compared to contemporaries. It was disabled by default at runtime starting with OpenSSH 7.0 in 2015 and fully removed in OpenSSH 10.0, released in April 2025, to eliminate legacy risks.
Security key variants, prefixed with "sk-", integrate hardware security modules like FIDO/U2F devices and were introduced in OpenSSH 8.2, released in February 2020. Supported types include sk-ecdsa-sha2-nistp256 (256 bits) and sk-ssh-ed25519 (256 bits), which bind keys to physical tokens for enhanced phishing resistance without relying on software-stored private keys. These are ideal for high-security environments requiring multi-factor authentication semantics.
Key TypeKey Sizes (bits)Approximate Symmetric Security EquivalentRelative PerformanceKey Advantages and Migration Notes
RSA2048+ (default 3072)112+ bits (for 2048-bit)ModerateExcellent compatibility; migrate to 3072+ bits from smaller legacy keys for future-proofing.
ECDSA256, 384, 521128, 192, 256 bitsGoodEfficient size-security trade-off; prefer 256-bit for general use over larger RSA.
Ed25519256 (fixed)~128 bitsFastestOptimal for speed and security; recommended defaulttransition from DSA or RSA for better efficiency.
sk-ECDSA/Ed25519256 (base)~128 bits + hardware bindingGoodPhishing-resistant; adopt for sensitive access alongside software keys.
Overall, Ed25519 provides the best combination of security, performance, and simplicity for most users, with its 256-bit keys achieving security comparable to much larger RSA equivalents while enabling faster authentication. Migration from deprecated DSA or undersized RSA is strongly advised to maintain robust protection against evolving threats.

Security

Known Vulnerabilities

OpenSSH has inherited several vulnerabilities from the original SSH-1 protocol, including weaknesses in its integrity checks such as the CRC-32 compensation attack, which allowed remote attackers to execute arbitrary code by exploiting an integer overflow in the attack detection mechanism (CVE-2001-0144). This issue affected early OpenSSH versions supporting SSH-1, but was addressed in OpenSSH 2.3.0 released in early 2000 by disabling vulnerable components. Additionally, a weak random number generator in the sshd server (CVE-2008-5161) enabled attackers to recover up to 32 bits of plaintext from CBC-mode ciphertexts through error handling flaws, impacting versions using deprecated CBC ciphers.
Privilege escalation vulnerabilities have also posed significant risks, notably a buffer overflow in the challenge-response authentication handling of sshd (CVE-2002-0640), which permitted remote unauthenticated attackers to execute arbitrary code as root by sending a large number of responses during authentication in versions 2.3.1 through 3.3. This flaw was mitigated through the introduction of privilege separation in OpenSSH 3.2 in 2003, which sandboxed unprivileged processes to limit potential damage from such overflows.
Information disclosure issues include a client-side vulnerability in the roaming feature (CVE-2016-0777), where malicious servers could trick OpenSSH clients in versions 5.4 through 7.1p1 into writing private keys to untrusted files or logging sensitive data like hostnames and usernames, potentially exposing credentials. This affected the default client configuration with roaming enabled, allowing remote servers to obtain sensitive information from process memory.
More recent vulnerabilities highlight ongoing challenges in authentication and denial-of-service protections. In CVE-2025-26465, attackers could perform man-in-the-middle attacks via DNS spoofing on systems with VerifyHostKeyDNS enabled in OpenSSH versions before 9.9p2, bypassing host key verification under specific network conditions. Similarly, CVE-2025-26466 introduced a pre-authentication denial-of-service in versions 9.5p1 through 9.9p1, where crafted packets could cause sshd to enter an infinite loop, exhausting resources. CVE-2025-61984 affected versions before 10.1 by allowing control characters in untrusted usernames to inject commands via ProxyCommand expansion, potentially leading to remote code execution.
Since its inception in 1999, OpenSSH has accumulated over 100 Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs), with the majority addressed in subsequent releases through timely patches. As of November 2025, no zero-day vulnerabilities in OpenSSH have been widely exploited in the wild.

Mitigation Strategies

To mitigate security risks in OpenSSH deployments, administrators should prioritize regular patching to the latest stable version, such as OpenSSH 10.2 released on October 10, 2025, which addresses recent vulnerabilities including those affecting ProxyCommand handling and DNS verification. Automated tools like unattended-upgrades on Debian-based systems can facilitate this by enabling automatic installation of security updates for OpenSSH packages, reducing exposure to known exploits through timely application of patches.
Configuration hardening is essential for limiting attack surfaces; disabling password authentication in favor of key-based authentication only, via setting PasswordAuthentication no in /etc/ssh/sshd_config, prevents brute-force attempts on weak credentials. Restricting user access through Match blocks in sshd_config allows fine-grained controls, such as permitting only specific users or groups for SSH access, thereby enforcing least-privilege principles. Additionally, limiting ciphers to modern algorithms like AES-GCM by specifying Ciphers ,, in the configuration avoids deprecated modes such as CBC, which are vulnerable to certain padding oracle attacks.
Effective monitoring involves analyzing SSH logs for signs of brute-force attacks, with integration of tools like Fail2Ban to automatically ban IP addresses after repeated failed login attempts by scanning /var/log/auth.log and applying iptables rules. Verifying host public key fingerprints during initial connections, as prompted by the ssh client, ensures man-in-the-middle resistance by confirming the expected SHA256 or ED25519 fingerprint against trusted sources.
For advanced protections, configuring chroot environments for SFTP-only users via ChrootDirectory and ForceCommand internal-sftp in sshd_config confines sessions to isolated directories, preventing broader system access even if credentials are compromised. Mandatory access controls like SELinux can further confine the sshd process by enabling booleans such as sshd_can_read_user_content_files and setting appropriate contexts on chroot directories, while AppArmor profiles restrict file access and network operations for the daemon. Regular rotation of SSH host and user keys, ideally every 90-180 days or after potential exposure, maintains forward secrecy and limits the impact of key compromise through generation of new key pairs and propagation via secure channels.
In response to recent threats, disabling ProxyCommand expansions for CVE-2025-61984 by updating to OpenSSH 10.1 or lateror avoiding untrusted inputs in ProxyCommand configurationsprevents command injection via control characters in usernames. Similarly, enabling strict DNS resolution or disabling the VerifyHostKeyDNS yes option mitigates CVE-2025-26465, with patching to version 9.9p2 or newer providing comprehensive resolution against man-in-the-middle attacks during host key verification.

Deployment and Usage

Installation Methods

OpenSSH can be installed on various operating systems using platform-specific package managers, built-in tools, or by compiling from source. The choice of method depends on the target system, with most distributions providing pre-built packages for ease of deployment.
On Debian-based Linux distributions, such as Debian 13 (codename Trixie, the current stable release) and Ubuntu, OpenSSH is installed via the Advanced Package Tool (APT) by running sudo apt update followed by sudo apt install openssh-server, which retrieves the package from the official repositories. The SSH service starts automatically after installation on systemd-based systems, and SFTP support is enabled by default for users with SSH access through the dependency on the openssh-sftp-server package.
For Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) and derivatives like CentOS, the DNF or YUM package manager is used; for example, on RHEL 8 and later, execute sudo dnf install openssh-server to install from the enabled repositories. On Fedora, the process is similar with sudo dnf install openssh-server, ensuring the latest version from Fedora's repositories is obtained.
For BSD variants like FreeBSD, OpenSSH is available as the openssh-portable package through the pkg tool; installation is performed with sudo pkg install openssh-portable, which pulls from the FreeBSD ports collection. On macOS, OpenSSH is included by default since early versions, and the server can be enabled by turning on Remote Login in the Sharing settings (System Settings > General > Sharing in macOS 13 and later; System Preferences > Sharing in earlier versions), without requiring additional installation.
Windows supports OpenSSH natively since Windows 10 version 1809 (October 2018 Update), where it can be added as an optional feature using PowerShell with the command Add-WindowsCapability -Online -Name OpenSSH.Server~~~~0.0.1.0, or through the Settings app under Apps > Optional features > Add a feature > OpenSSH Server. Alternatively, on Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), OpenSSH follows the Linux distribution's installation method, such as APT for Ubuntu on WSL.
To install from source, download the latest portable release tarball from the official OpenSSH website at https://www.openssh.com/portable.html, extract it, and compile using the standard autotools sequence: ./configure, make, and sudo make install, assuming dependencies like OpenSSL and zlib are pre-installed.
Post-installation verification involves checking the version with ssh -V to confirm the installed OpenSSH release, and for systems using systemd (common on Linux), querying the service status with systemctl status sshd to ensure the daemon is active and enabled.

Configuration Basics

OpenSSH configuration is managed through two primary files: sshd_config for the server daemon and ssh_config for the client. These files use a simple keyword-value format, where directives can be set globally or overridden in host-specific sections. Changes to sshd_config require restarting the SSH daemon to take effect, while client configurations apply immediately upon invocation of the ssh command.
The server configuration file, typically located at /etc/ssh/sshd_config, controls the behavior of the sshd daemon. The Port directive specifies the listening port, with a default of 22; multiple Port lines can be specified to listen on more than one port. For example, setting Port 2233 configures the SSH service to listen on port 2233 instead of or in addition to the default. It is common to comment out or remove the default Port 22 line when using a custom port to reduce exposure to automated attacks.
On Debian-based systems such as Ubuntu and Debian, to configure sshd to listen on a custom port (for example, 2233), perform the following steps:

Edit the configuration file:
sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config
Change or add the line:
Port 2233
(Comment out or remove the default Port 22 if you do not want to keep listening on port 22.)

Test the configuration for syntax errors:
sudo sshd -t
If no errors are reported, the syntax is valid.

Restart the SSH service (note: on Ubuntu and Debian, the service is typically named ssh, not sshd):
sudo systemctl restart ssh

If UFW is enabled, allow the new port through the firewall:
sudo ufw allow 2233/tcp
sudo ufw reload

Verify that sshd is listening on the new port:
sudo ss -tuln | grep 2233
or
sudo netstat -tuln | grep 2233

Common reasons why connections to the custom port may fail include:

The SSH service was not restarted after making changes.

The firewall (UFW, iptables, firewalld, or a cloud provider's security group) is blocking the new port.

A syntax error exists in the sshd_config file (use sshd -t to check and journalctl -u ssh -xe to view logs).

Another process is already using port 2233.

The client command did not specify the custom port (use ssh -p 2233 user@host).

Existing connections on port 22 remain open after the restart, but new connections to port 22 will fail if Port 22 is no longer configured.

On Windows systems, including Windows 11, the default SSH port is 22, and the server configuration file is located at C:\ProgramData\ssh\sshd_config. To change the port on Windows 11, edit this file to uncomment or modify the Port line (e.g., Port 2222), restart the sshd service using PowerShell as Administrator with the command Restart-Service sshd, and update the Windows Firewall inbound rule to allow traffic on the new port.
The ListenAddress directive defines the local IP addresses on which sshd binds, defaulting to all available addresses (0.0.0.0 and ::); an entry like ListenAddress 192.168.1.100 restricts it to a specific interface.
PermitRootLogin governs root user access, defaulting to prohibit-password, which disables password-based logins for root while allowing public key authentication; setting it to no fully prohibits root logins.
PubkeyAuthentication enables or disables public key-based authentication, defaulting to yes, as in PubkeyAuthentication yes.
Common server directives include MaxAuthTries, which limits authentication attempts per connection to a default of 6 (e.g., MaxAuthTries 3 reduces it to prevent brute-force risks), and ClientAliveInterval, which sets the interval in seconds for sending keep-alive messages to the client if no data is received, defaulting to 0 (disabled); for instance, ClientAliveInterval 300 sends messages every 5 minutes.
The client configuration file, usually at /etc/ssh/ssh_config or ~/.ssh/config, allows per-host customization. Host-specific blocks are defined with the Host keyword followed by a pattern, such as:
Host example.com
 IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa
This applies settings only to connections to example.com.
The IdentityFile directive specifies private key files for authentication, defaulting to ~/.ssh/id_rsa, ~/.ssh/id_ecdsa, ~/.ssh/id_ed25519, and others; multiple files can be listed for sequential trials.
StrictHostKeyChecking controls verification of the server's host key, defaulting to ask, which prompts the user for new hosts; options include yes (strict verification, no auto-add) or no (auto-add without prompts), as in StrictHostKeyChecking no for automated scripts.
By default, on the first invocation of sshd, host keys (such as RSA, ECDSA, and Ed25519) are automatically generated in /etc/ssh/ if they do not exist, using ssh-keygen internally.
To apply changes to the server, restart the service using systemctl restart sshd on systemd-based systems like most modern Linux distributions. On Ubuntu and Debian, use systemctl restart ssh instead. On Windows, use Restart-Service sshd in PowerShell as Administrator. Client configurations can be tested with the ssh command's -o option to override settings temporarily, such as ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no user@host to bypass host key checks for a single connection.

Community and Extensions

Licensing and Ports

OpenSSH's core codebase is released under a permissive BSD-style license, allowing free use, modification, and distribution for any purpose, including commercial applications, provided that the original copyright notices and disclaimers are retained. Most components of the software fall under the 2-clause BSD license, while certain elements derived from University of California Berkeley code are governed by the 3-clause BSD license.
The portable distribution of OpenSSH, designed for integration into non-OpenBSD operating systems such as Linux, macOS, Windows, and various Unix-like environments, maintains the same core licensing framework but incorporates additional permissive licenses for portability enhancements and replacement components. For instance, compatibility code in the openbsd-compat subdirectory includes elements under both 2-clause and 3-clause BSD licenses donated from other BSD projects, and optional dependencies like the zlib compression library operate under the zlib license, which permits unrestricted use with minimal attribution requirements. This model ensures broad compatibility without introducing copyleft obligations, as OpenSSH explicitly avoids any GPL-licensed code.
The portable OpenSSH is developed and maintained as an independent project parallel to the OpenBSD base system version, with releases marked by a "p" suffix (e.g., 9.9p2) to distinguish them. While it tracks the official OpenBSD releases for feature synchronization, the portable variant receives separate bug fixes, platform-specific adaptations, and testing to support diverse environments, preventing disruptions to the core OpenBSD implementation. This separation facilitates widespread adoption across operating systems while preserving the security-focused development of the original.
Development of OpenSSH, including both the core and portable versions, relies on volunteer contributions from a dedicated team of developers associated with the OpenBSD project, with no formal barriers to participation beyond code quality and security standards. Funding for these efforts is secured through donations to the OpenBSD Foundation, a non-profit organization that supports OpenSSH alongside other OpenBSD subprojects, enabling hackathons, infrastructure, and developer stipends without imposing commercial restrictions on the software's use or redistribution.

Integrations and Alternatives

OpenSSH seamlessly integrates with version control systems such as Git, enabling secure authentication via SSH keys for cloning, pushing, and pulling repositories over encrypted channels. In cloud environments, it facilitates secure access through tunneling mechanisms; for instance, AWS IoT Core leverages OpenSSH-compatible SSH tunneling to establish port forwarding between local clients and remote devices without exposing ports publicly. Similarly, Azure Bastion acts as a proxy for SSH connections to virtual machines, allowing users to connect via the Azure portal or native SSH clients while maintaining secure, audited sessions. OpenSSH's dynamic port forwarding, exemplified by the ssh -D option, creates SOCKS proxies that serve as lightweight alternatives to full VPN setups for routing traffic through remote hosts.
Within automation ecosystems, OpenSSH serves as the default transport for tools like Ansible, which relies on SSH connections to managed nodes for executing playbooks and configuring systems without requiring agent installation on targets. Chef, another configuration management platform, similarly employs OpenSSH for remote execution during infrastructure provisioning and compliance checks. For enhanced mobile and intermittent connectivity, Mosh integrates with OpenSSH by using it for initial authentication and UDP-based roaming, providing responsive terminal sessions that predictively update displays even under network disruptions.
As an open-source implementation, OpenSSH contrasts with proprietary alternatives like Tectia SSH, which offers enterprise-grade features including 24/7 support, centralized management, and specialized editions for zero-trust and quantum-safe environments, though at the cost of licensing fees. Dropbear provides a lightweight alternative optimized for resource-constrained embedded systems, with a smaller binary size and reduced dependencies compared to OpenSSH's fuller feature set, making it ideal for routers and IoT devices. Libssh, an API-focused C library, enables developers to embed SSH client and server capabilities directly into applications, offering greater programmatic control than OpenSSH's command-line tools but requiring custom integration.
OpenSSH's strengths lie in its widespread auditability due to open-source code, fostering community-driven security enhancements, while its weaknesses include the absence of dedicated commercial support and built-in graphical interfacesusers often pair it with tools like PuTTY for Windows-based GUI access. Looking ahead, OpenSSH is preparing for post-quantum threats through hybrid key exchange algorithms; since version 9.0 (April 2022), it defaults to post-quantum key agreement with sntrup761x25519-sha512, and version 10.0 (April 2025) adopts mlkem768x25519-sha256 as the primary method to resist quantum attacks on classical cryptography.

References

OpenSSH

Project History - OpenSSH

Manual Pages - OpenSSH

Release Notes - OpenSSH

Chapter 12. OpenSSH | Red Hat Enterprise Linux | 7

OpenSSH for Windows overview | Microsoft Learn

ssh(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

scp(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

sftp(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

sshd(8) - OpenBSD manual pages

ssh-keygen(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

ssh-agent(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

None

ssh-keyscan(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

ssh_config(5) - OpenBSD manual pages

sshd_config(5) - OpenBSD manual pages

SSH History - Part 1 - SSH Communications Security

https://undeadly.org/cgi?action=article;sid=20070926182742

Media Coverage - OpenSSH

OpenBSD 2.6

Goals - OpenSSH

for OpenBSD - OpenSSH

Portable Release - OpenSSH

Specifications - OpenSSH

RFC 8731 - Secure Shell (SSH) Key Exchange Method Using ...

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5647

Release Notes - OpenSSH

Security - OpenSSH

ssh-keygen(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

OpenSSH 6.5 Released

Comparing SSH Keys - RSA, DSA, ECDSA, or EdDSA? - Teleport

https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2001-0144

https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2008-5161

CVE-2002-0640 Detail - NVD

https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2016-0777

Roaming through the OpenSSH client: CVE-2016-0777 and 0778

CVE-2025-61984 Detail - NVD

Automatic Linux Update: OpenSSH CVE-2024-6387 - Cloudron Forum

Should I enable automatic security updates on a Ubuntu server?

How to disable ssh password login on Linux to increase security

Top 20 OpenSSH Server Best Security Practices - nixCraft

SSH Hardening Guides

Protect Your SSH Server from Brute Force Attacks - DEV Community

How to Block Brute-Force Attacks on SSH: Step by Step guide

OpenSSH - Security Assurance and Security Operations - Mozilla

How to Setup Chroot SFTP in Linux (Allow Only SFTP, not SSH)

How to configure SFTP chroot with SELinux enforcing mode.

CVE-2025-61984 Impact, Exploitability, and Mitigation Steps | Wiz

OpenSSH Vulnerabilities CVE-2025-26465 and ... - Upwind Security

CVE-2025-26465: Mitigate vulnerable OpenSSH - vsociety - Vicarius

OpenSSH - Fedora Docs

The portable version of OpenBSD's OpenSSH - FreshPorts

Get started with OpenSSH Server for Windows - Microsoft Learn

sshd_config(5) - OpenBSD manual pages

ssh_config(5) - OpenBSD manual pages

ssh(1) - OpenBSD manual pages

Open SSH - Oracle Help Center

Portable OpenSSH - GitHub

Donations - OpenSSH

Donate to the OpenBSD Foundation

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/use-ssh-keys-to-authenticate

None

Secure File Transfer, Remote Access & Tunneling Software Tectia | SSH

Post-Quantum Cryptography - OpenSSH

Get started with OpenSSH for Windows

Debian Stable Release Information

Debian Package Details: openssh-server
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion