Padding Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Padding
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Padding is a soft or resilient material used to provide cushioning, protection, insulation, or structural shape to objects and garments, often inserted between layers of fabric or applied to surfaces. It serves essential functions in enhancing comfort, safety, and aesthetics across various applications, from everyday items to specialized equipment.
The historical use of padding in clothing emerged prominently in 14th-century Europe, where padded torso and thigh garments, known as pourpoints, were worn for sword-fighting protection and to create a fuller silhouette beneath fitted outerwear. By the 16th and 17th centuries, bombastpadding typically made from cotton, wool, or horsehairbecame a staple in tailoring to achieve exaggerated forms, such as in doublets for men and bum rolls for women to support wide skirts. This technique evolved through the 19th century with the rise of bustles, which employed padded cushions or wire frames under dresses to accentuate the posterior, reflecting shifting ideals of feminine form during the Victorian era.
Modern padding materials encompass both natural and synthetic varieties to meet diverse needs for durability, breathability, and sustainability. Natural options include cotton, wool, feathers, and horsehair, valued for their traditional resilience in upholstery and quilting. Synthetic materials, such as polyurethane foam and densified polyester batting (e.g., bonded Dacron), dominate contemporary applications due to their moldability, fire resistance, and cost-effectiveness, particularly in furniture and automotive seating. Innovations like fiber-based composites from nylon or electrostatically flocked textiles are increasingly used in high-impact protective gear, such as football helmets, to absorb shocks more effectively than traditional foam alone.
Key applications of padding span multiple industries, underscoring its versatility. In fashion and textiles, it provides insulation in winter apparel and shaping in structured garments like jackets with shoulder pads. For protective purposes, warp-knitted spacer fabrics offer energy absorption in sports equipment and body armor, adapting to dynamic compression for optimal safety. In upholstery and furniture, padding ensures ergonomic support in chairs and sofas, with materials selected for longevity under repeated use. In computing, padding refers to added data in cryptographic protocols or memory structures to meet size requirements or enhance security. Beyond the physical, the term "padding" figuratively denotes superfluous content added to speeches, writings, or reports to extend length without substance, a usage rooted in the idea of artificial filling.

In textiles and clothing

For altering silhouette

Padding in textiles and clothing has long been employed to modify the wearer's body shape, enhancing aesthetic appeal and conforming to prevailing fashion ideals. In the 16th century, bombasta stuffing composed of cotton, wool, horsehair, or sawdustwas commonly inserted into men's doublets and hose to create exaggerated broad shoulders and a barrel-shaped torso, emphasizing masculine proportions during the Renaissance period. Similarly, in the 19th century, bustles served as padded undergarments or wire frames at the rear of women's dresses, projecting the hips outward to achieve the dramatic, elongated silhouette favored in Victorian and Edwardian eras.
These historical techniques persist in modern fashion, where padding continues to sculpt idealized forms. Padded bras, first patented in 1947 by Frederick Mellinger, add volume to the bust for a fuller chest, aligning with post-World War II trends toward curvaceous figures. Shoulder pads, integrated into blazers and jackets since the 1930s under designers like Elsa Schiaparelli and peaking in the 1980s power-dressing movement, broaden the upper body to convey authority and structure. In contemporary drag performance attire, hip and butt pads exaggerate lower-body curves, crafting an amplified hourglass shape that amplifies feminine stereotypes for artistic expression.
Common materials for such padding include natural options like cotton wadding and horsehair from historical contexts, alongside modern synthetics such as polyurethane foam and polyester fiberfill, which provide lightweight, moldable support while maintaining garment drape.
Culturally, padding reinforces beauty standards tied to silhouette: in Western fashion, it has historically promoted the hourglass figure through bustles and padded undergarments, symbolizing femininity and status from the 19th century onward. In contrast, traditional Japanese garments like kimono employ paddingsuch as half-moon bust padsto flatten the torso and hips, ensuring a smooth, straight-lined silhouette essential for the garment's elegant drape and cultural propriety.

For protection and comfort

Padding in clothing serves a critical function in providing protection against physical impacts, abrasions, and environmental stressors while enhancing wearer comfort through cushioning and support. This is achieved by integrating materials that absorb shock, distribute pressure, and maintain insulation without compromising mobility. Common applications include outerwear designed for harsh conditions and specialized garments for occupational or recreational use, where padding mitigates strain on joints and muscles.
Various materials are employed for these purposes, including natural down feathers, which offer superior insulation by trapping air in lightweight clusters for warmth in padded jackets. Synthetic alternatives, such as 3M Thinsulate, utilize microfibers to replicate down's thermal properties while providing better moisture resistance and durability in wet conditions. For targeted orthopedic support, gel inserts made from viscoelastic polymers, like those in Cramer Ortho Gel padding, conform to body contours, deflect impacts, and reduce pressure on sensitive areas such as knees or hips when incorporated into clothing layers.
In practical applications, padded jackets with synthetic insulation protect against cold in outerwear for outdoor workers, while integrated knee and elbow pads in workwear, such as those from Ergodyne, shield joints from repetitive kneeling or crawling on rough surfaces. Padded cycling shorts feature chamois padding that distributes saddle pressure evenly, alleviating perineal discomfort and vibration during extended rides to prevent chafing and nerve compression. These designs prioritize ergonomic benefits, like even pressure distribution to minimize fatigue and injury risk in high-strain activities.
The evolution of padding materials in clothing has transitioned from natural fibers like wool and cotton, valued for their breathability and insulation since ancient times, to modern synthetics developed in the mid-20th century for enhanced performance. Wool provided natural moisture-wicking and durability in early protective garments, but synthetics like nylon (1935) and polyester (1953) introduced superior resistance to wear, faster drying, and consistent insulation, revolutionizing workwear and active apparel for demanding environments.

In sports and recreation

Protective padding in equipment

Protective padding in sports equipment is designed to mitigate the forces of impacts during high-contact activities, thereby reducing the risk of injuries such as concussions, fractures, and soft tissue damage. This padding is typically integrated into helmets, gloves, pads, and guards, where it functions by distributing kinetic energy over a larger area and absorbing shock through deformation. For instance, in American football, helmets feature multi-layered foam padding that lines the interior shell to cushion the head against collisions. Similarly, boxing gloves incorporate dense foam cores, often made from multi-density polyurethane, to protect both the wearer's hands and the opponent's face by dissipating punch forces over time. In martial arts and soccer, shin guards use lightweight foam padding, such as EVA (ethylene-vinyl acetate), molded around the lower leg to shield against kicks and tackles, preventing bruises and bone injuries.
From a materials science perspective, many protective paddings rely on viscoelastic foams that exhibit time-dependent deformation under load, allowing them to compress upon impact and subsequently recover their shape to maintain protective integrity over repeated uses. Ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) foams, valued for their low cost and high energy absorption, are commonly used in shin guards and helmet liners due to their ability to attenuate impacts at velocities typical in sports. Polyurethane foams, particularly closed-cell varieties, provide similar viscoelastic properties but with enhanced durability, deforming elastically to absorb significant impact energy through elastic deformation while recovering shape for repeated use. These materials' effectiveness stems from their shear-thinning behavior, where viscosity decreases under rapid stress, enabling rapid energy dissipation without permanent damage.
Regulatory standards ensure that protective padding meets minimum performance thresholds for safety. Standards like ASTM F1492 and NOCSAE protocols outline performance requirements for football helmets, including tests for linear and rotational impacts. In the NFL, equipment regulations mandate that helmets incorporate padding systems certified under NOCSAE protocols, which test for both linear and rotational impacts and limit severity index to 1200. These standards are periodically updated based on biomechanical research, emphasizing padding configurations that optimize coverage without compromising mobility.
Innovations in padding technology have introduced smart materials that adapt dynamically to impacts. D3O, a non-Newtonian dilatant material, is embedded in equipment like motorcycle armor and rugby pads; it remains flexible during normal movement but instantly hardens upon high-speed impact to absorb and dissipate energy more effectively than some traditional foams. Recent developments include Guardian Caps, soft-shell covers approved by the NFL for regular-season use as of 2024, which add external padding to further reduce head impact severity and have been associated with up to 50% lower concussion rates in practices.

Padding in facilities and environments

Padding in facilities and environments refers to the installation of protective materials on fixed surfaces and structures within recreational and institutional settings, such as gyms, playgrounds, and arenas, to mitigate injuries from falls or collisions. These installations complement portable equipment padding by addressing stationary hazards like walls, floors under elevated structures, and protrusions. Common applications include foam mats placed beneath climbing walls to cushion falls during bouldering or traverse activities, and padded walls in wrestling rooms or gymnasiums to absorb impacts from tumbling or out-of-bounds plays. In playgrounds, wall padding safeguards against collisions with surrounding barriers, while in arenas, it protects against high-speed encounters near boundaries.
Materials for these paddings prioritize impact absorption, durability, and maintenance ease. High-density polyethylene foam is widely used for its resilient shock-absorbing properties, often formed into panels or mats that maintain shape under repeated use. These foams are typically encased in vinyl-covered layers, such as 14- to 18-ounce vinyl-coated polyester, which provide resistance to wear, moisture, and cleaning agents, ensuring longevity in high-traffic areas like indoor gyms or outdoor playgrounds. For added structural integrity, paddings may be bonded to oriented strand board backings, enhancing installation stability without compromising flexibility.
Safety standards govern the design and performance of these paddings to ensure effective injury prevention. In the United States, the ASTM International standard F2440 specifies impact attenuation requirements for wall padding in indoor sports venues, mandating a maximum head injury criterion (HIC) of 1000 and g-max acceleration of 200 to simulate safe collision forces. Typical thicknesses range from 2 inches for gym wall panels to 12 inches or more for loose-fill equivalents under playground climbing structures, calibrated to fall heights up to 8 feet. The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) emphasizes protective surfacing under playground equipment, recommending at least 12 inches of impact-attenuating material like engineered foam to reduce fall-related injuries, though wall-specific guidelines align with ASTM for protrusion hazards. Compliance with these standards, including fire-retardant ratings like NFPA 286, is required in institutional settings to meet building codes and liability protections.
The use of padding in sports facilities emerged in the 20th century amid growing awareness of injury risks and regulatory pressures. Stadium wall pads were first introduced in the 1940s to handle high-impact collisions, evolving from basic cushions to standardized systems as sports participation surged post-World War II. In the early 2000s, with the publication of ASTM F2440 in 2004, requirements were formalized, driven by injury prevention laws and lawsuits that compelled facilities to retrofit hard surfaces, significantly reducing concussion and contusion rates in organized athletics.

In computing and information technology

Cryptographic padding

In cryptography, padding refers to the addition of extra bits or bytes to a plaintext message to ensure it conforms to the required block size of a block cipher algorithm, such as AES or DES, which process data in fixed-length blocks (typically 64 or 128 bits). This process is essential because most messages do not naturally align with these block boundaries, and without padding, the encryption would be incomplete or malformed. Beyond mere length adjustment, cryptographic padding enhances security by randomizing the input to prevent predictable patterns that could leak information about the plaintext, and it helps mitigate certain attacks, such as those exploiting message length or structure.
The historical development of cryptographic padding traces back to the introduction of block ciphers in the 1970s, with the Data Encryption Standard (DES) published in 1977 as a foundational example. Early methods, such as those outlined in FIPS 81 (1980), used simple techniques like appending zero bits (null padding) or filling unused bits in the last block to reach the 64-bit block size, ensuring compatibility with modes like ECB and CBC. These approaches evolved into standardized schemes by the 1990s, driven by the need for interoperability in public-key infrastructure (PKI) and secure messaging, culminating in modern standards for algorithms like AES (FIPS 197, 2001) and RSA. The shift from ad-hoc padding to formalized methods addressed vulnerabilities exposed by growing computational power and cryptanalytic advances.
One of the most widely adopted padding schemes for symmetric block ciphers is PKCS#7, defined in the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) standard. PKCS#7 padding works by calculating the remainder $ r $ when the message length is divided by the block size $ b $ (e.g., $ b = 16 $ bytes for AES); if $ r = 0 $, a full block of padding is added. It then appends $ k = b - r $ bytes, where each of these bytes has the decimal value $ k $, making the padding self-describing and easily removable during decryption. For example, if $ b = 8 $ and $ r = 3 $, five bytes each valued at 5 (0x05 in hex) are added. This scheme is versatile for any block size up to 255 bytes and is recommended for use in CBC and other modes to maintain integrity.
For asymmetric encryption, such as RSA, Optimal Asymmetric Encryption Padding (OAEP) is a prominent scheme that integrates padding with randomization to achieve provable security. Introduced by Bellare and Rogaway in 1994, OAEP prepends a structured padding stringincluding a fixed '01' byte, random bytes, and a hash of the messageto the plaintext before exponentiation, using functions like a mask generation function (MGF) based on a hash (e.g., SHA-256) to diffuse the randomness. This design ensures the padded message fills the modulus size (e.g., 2048 bits) while providing semantic security. OAEP is standardized in PKCS#1 v2.2 and is the preferred method for RSA to replace the less secure PKCS#1 v1.5 padding.
Cryptographic padding plays a critical role in resisting chosen-ciphertext attacks (CCA), where an adversary submits modified ciphertexts to learn about the plaintext. Improper padding can create a "padding oracle"a side-channel that reveals whether decryption succeeded based on padding validityenabling byte-by-byte recovery of the message, as demonstrated by Vaudenay in 2002 against CBC-mode with PKCS#5/7 padding. Robust schemes like OAEP provide IND-CCA2 security under the random oracle model, assuming the underlying trapdoor permutation (e.g., RSA) is one-way, thus preventing such oracles and ensuring confidentiality even against adaptive adversaries. In contrast to structural padding in data structures, which focuses on alignment for efficiency, cryptographic padding prioritizes security properties.

Structural padding in data and memory

Structural padding in data and memory involves the automatic insertion of unused bytes, known as padding, within data structures to align their members according to hardware requirements, thereby optimizing access efficiency on modern processors. This alignment ensures that each data member starts at an address that is a multiple of its natural alignment boundarytypically 1 byte for char, 2 bytes for short, 4 bytes for int on 32-bit systems, and 8 bytes for long long or pointers on 64-bit systemsreducing the number of memory cycles needed for reads and writes, as unaligned accesses can trigger hardware penalties or exceptions on certain architectures. The purpose stems from processor design, where data fetches are most efficient when aligned to word sizes (e.g., 32-bit or 64-bit boundaries), preventing partial cache line loads or bus inefficiencies that could slow execution by factors of 2 to 10 times.
A common example occurs in C and C++ structures (struct), where compilers insert padding between members to satisfy alignment rules. Consider the following structure on a 32-bit system:
struct Example {
 char a; // 1 byte, aligned at offset 0
 int b; // 4 bytes, requires alignment at multiple of 4
}; // Padding: 3 bytes after 'a' to align 'b' at offset 4
Here, the compiler adds 3 unused bytes after a so b begins at an address divisible by 4, making the total struct size 8 bytes (padded to a multiple of the largest member's alignment). Without this padding, accessing b could incur performance overhead or portability issues across platforms. Developers can minimize padding by reordering members from largest to smallest size or using compiler directives like #pragma pack(n) to specify tighter packing (e.g., n=1 for byte-aligned, no padding), though this often trades memory efficiency for potential slowdowns in access speed.
The impacts of structural padding include increased memory footprintsometimes by 20-50% in poorly designed structuresbut corresponding gains in runtime performance, particularly in cache-heavy applications where aligned data reduces misses and improves prefetching. In multithreaded environments, a related technique called cache line padding extends this concept by adding bytes (typically 64 bytes, the common cache line size on x86 processors) around shared variables to prevent false sharing, where concurrent threads updating adjacent data inadvertently invalidate each other's cache lines, leading to unnecessary coherence traffic and up to 4x slowdowns in parallel workloads. This optimization is crucial in high-performance computing, as evidenced by its use in libraries like the Java Disruptor, where padding isolates counters to separate cache lines.

In design and manufacturing

Padding in graphic and user interface design

In graphic and user interface design, padding refers to the space added inside the border of an element, separating its content from the surrounding border or edge, which enhances visual clarity and prevents content from touching boundaries. This concept is prominently implemented in Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) for web development, where the padding property serves as a shorthand to define this internal spacing on one or more sides of an element, such as padding: 10px; for uniform application to all sides. The property accepts length values (e.g., pixels or ems) or percentages relative to the containing block's width, and it cannot be negative.
The emergence of padding in CSS traces back to the mid-1990s, as part of the foundational work on separating structural content from stylistic spacing to provide designers with finer control over layouts, distinct from external margins. Proposed in initial drafts by Hkon Wium Lie in 1994, padding was formalized in the CSS Level 1 (CSS1) specification, released as a W3C Recommendation on December 17, 1996, where it was defined as a shorthand for individual side properties like padding-top and padding-left. This introduction addressed early web design challenges, such as cramped text rendering in browsers like Netscape Navigator, by allowing precise internal buffering without altering document structure.
Padding integrates deeply with the CSS box model, which conceptualizes every element as a rectangular box comprising content, padding, border, and margin areas, influencing how element dimensions are calculated. In the default content-box sizing mode, the specified width or height applies only to the content area, with padding adding to the total size (e.g., a 200px-wide element with 10px padding on each side totals 220px). Conversely, the border-box mode, introduced for broader compatibility in CSS3 but widely adopted earlier via vendor prefixes, includes padding and border within the specified dimensions, simplifying responsive design by keeping totals predictable. This variation affects usability in user interfaces, as improper padding can lead to overflow or cramped interactions, particularly on mobile devices.
In practice, padding is applied in web and UI design to improve readability by creating breathing room around text, images, and interactive components, such as adding space inside buttons to enlarge touch targets for better accessibility on touchscreens. For instance, in form elements or navigation menus, consistent padding ensures content does not abut borders, reducing visual clutter and aiding scannability, while in app interfaces like those built with frameworks such as Material Design, it maintains hierarchical spacing between UI components for intuitive navigation. These uses prioritize user experience by balancing density and whitespace, contributing to aesthetic appeal without expanding overall layout footprint.

Padding in product assembly and cushioning

In product assembly, padding serves as an essential cushioning component integrated during manufacturing to enhance user comfort, absorb impacts, and protect internal structures in the final product. This process involves selecting and fabricating materials like flexible polyurethane foam (FPF), which provides resilient support between rigid frames and outer coverings, commonly in furniture and automotive applications. For instance, in upholstered furniture production, FPF is layered onto spring systems or bases to bridge the gap between structural elements and fabric, ensuring long-term durability and ergonomic benefits.
Flexible polyurethane foams dominate cushioning in these assemblies due to their ability to conform to shapes while maintaining shape retention under repeated use, with densities typically ranging from 1.2 to 2.5 pounds per cubic foot for optimal balance of comfort and support. During assembly, foam is often cut, molded, or die-formed to precise specifications before attachment via adhesives or mechanical fasteners, reducing vibration transmission and preventing component wear. In automotive seat manufacturing, similar FPF variants are molded directly onto metal frames, followed by trimming and covering with upholstery, which accounts for a significant portion of vehicle interior cushioning needs and has evolved from early latex replacements since the mid-20th century.
Beyond end-product integration, padding materials are employed in assembly lines to safeguard delicate components and mitigate ergonomic risks for workers. Polyurethane or elastomeric pads are placed on fixtures, conveyors, and handling tools to cushion parts during transport and joining operations, minimizing scratches, dents, and noise in electronics and machinery production. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration recommends such padding to reduce direct contact with hard or vibrating surfaces, thereby lowering musculoskeletal disorder risks in repetitive assembly tasks.
In specialized assemblies like medical devices or consumer electronics, custom-molded foams such as cross-linked polyethylene provide anti-static and shock-absorbing properties, ensuring safe integration without compromising functionality. These materials undergo rigorous testing for compression set and resilience, with standards like those from the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers guiding evaluation for mechanical packaging equivalents in product cushioning. Overall, effective padding selection in assembly enhances product longevity and safety, with FPF's widespread adoption reflecting its cost-efficiency and performance in high-volume manufacturing.

References

Definition of PADDING

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/padding

Puffed-Out Chests and Paunched Bellies - Bard Graduate Center

bombast/bombasted | Fashion History Timeline

bum roll | Fashion History Timeline

 History Of The Bustle History Of The Bustle

https://www.kovifabrics.com/blog/upholstery-padding/

Novel Fiber-Based Padding Materials for Football Helmets ...

A study of warp-knitted spacer fabrics as cushioning materials for ...

bustle | Fashion History Timeline

The Empowering History of the Shoulder Pads Trend - Coveteur

How Drag Queen Styles Influence Modern Fashion Trends

Shoulder Pads and Wadding in Clothing: Types and Uses

https://www.vam.ac.uk/articles/corsets-crinolines-and-bustles-fashionable-victorian-underwear

Various undergarments half moon padding

Elbow & Knee Pads - Grainger Industrial Supply

Down vs. Synthetic: Which Insulation is Right for You? - REI

3M Thinsulate Insulation

Cramer Ortho Gel Padding Material: Adhesive Comfort & Protection

Gel Knee Pads for Work | Ergodyne

Padded Cycling Shorts - Are They Worth It | REI Expert Advice

History of Textile Fibers - FabricLink

Complete Guide to Synthetic Fabrics - Herculite

https://www.greatmats.com/which-sports-need-wall-padding.php

https://www.envirolite.com/blogs/foam-for-thought/create-safer-play-spaces-with-durable-wall-padding

Safety Padding Solutions | National Sports Nets

https://www.greatmats.com/products/wall-padding.php

Standard Bonded Foam Wall Pad - Gared Sports

Buy Vinyl Gym Wall Padding | School Fix

F2440 Standard Specification for Impact Attenuation of Wall Padding ...

Standards Are Critical for Gym Safety - ASTM

 Public Playground Safety Handbook

Stadium Padding Solutions: Enhancing Safety & Comfort

The Essential Guide to Gym Wall Padding Standards

What Safety Standards Should Sports Facilities Meet with Field Wall ...

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5652.html#section-6.3

 Optimal Asymmetric Encryption How to Encrypt with RSA - UCSD CSE

Type Alignment (GNU C Language Manual)

 CSE 220: Systems Programming - Alignment, Padding, and Packing

3.5. Aligning a Struct with or without Padding - Intel

False Sharing - Mechanical Sympathy

.NET Matters: False Sharing | Microsoft Learn

Cascading Style Sheets, level 1 - W3C

CSS history - W3C

Spacing - Layout Material Design 3

 The Furniture Industry's Guide to Today's Flexible Polyurethane Foam

https://www.uniflexinc.com/products/custom-molded-polyurethane/cushions-storage-pads/

Ergonomics - Solutions to Control Hazards | Occupational Safety and Health Administration

Padding Manufacturers and Suppliers in the USA and Canada

A Method of Evaluating Cushioning Materials Used in Mechanical ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion