Parse tree Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Parse tree
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A parse tree, also known as a derivation tree, is a hierarchical, rooted tree that represents the syntactic structure of a string according to a context-free grammar (CFG), where the root is labeled with the grammar's start symbol, interior nodes are labeled with nonterminal symbols, and the leaves are labeled with terminal symbols that concatenate to form the string, known as the yield of the tree. Each interior node corresponds directly to a production rule in the CFG, with its children ordered left-to-right matching the right-hand side of that production. Parse trees provide a graphical visualization of derivations, such as leftmost or rightmost derivations, without specifying the sequence of production applications.
In compiler design, parse trees play a central role in the syntax analysis phase, where they are constructed by parsers to verify that a source program adheres to the grammar's rules and to capture its hierarchical structure for subsequent processing. They enable syntax-directed translation by allowing traversal (e.g., postorder) to evaluate attributes or generate intermediate code, and serve as an intermediate representation before simplification into abstract syntax trees (ASTs), which omit unnecessary details like parentheses or redundant nonterminals. A key property is their relation to grammar ambiguity: a CFG is ambiguous if at least one string has two or more distinct parse trees, which can lead to multiple interpretations of the same input and requires grammar redesign for unambiguous parsing in practical systems.
Beyond compilers, parse trees are essential in formal language theory for analyzing context-free languages and in natural language processing for representing sentence structures, though they differ from dependency trees by emphasizing constituency over linear relations. For unambiguous grammars, each valid string corresponds to a unique parse tree, facilitating efficient recognition algorithms like those in LL or LR parsers. In practice, explicit construction of full parse trees may be avoided in favor of incremental building during parsing to optimize performance.

Fundamentals

Definition and Purpose

A parse tree is a tree in graph theory that represents the syntactic structure of a string derived from a context-free grammar (CFG), where nodes denote syntactic categories or terminal words, and edges correspond to the application of production rules in the grammar, with the root labeled by the start symbol and the leaves forming the input string in order. This structure encodes a specific derivation path from the grammar's start symbol to the terminal string, ensuring that the tree is ordered to preserve the linear sequence of the leaves.
The primary purpose of a parse tree is to visualize and validate the generative process by which a grammar produces a given string, facilitating the identification of syntactic ambiguities where multiple valid trees exist for the same input, and supporting detailed syntactic analysis by revealing hierarchical constituent relationships. In formal language theory, parse trees serve as a concrete representation of derivations, enabling proofs of language properties and the study of grammatical equivalence.
The concept of parse trees originated in the 1950s within formal language theory, with foundational roots in Noam Chomsky's development of generative grammars as outlined in his 1957 work Syntactic Structures, where tree diagrams illustrated phrase structure rules. Unlike semantic representations, which focus on meaning and logical form, parse trees exclusively capture the concrete syntactic structure governed by the grammar's rules, independent of interpretive content.
In modern contexts, parse trees remain essential in automated parsing algorithms to verify the grammaticality of inputs by constructing or checking for valid derivations, underpinning tools in computational linguistics and compiler design. This core idea primarily underlies constituency parse trees in CFGs; dependency parse trees use a different structure emphasizing word relations.

Basic Terminology

A parse tree is a hierarchical representation of syntactic structure, composed of nodes connected by directed edges. The root node, labeled with the start symbol of the grammar, serves as the origin of the derivation process. Internal nodes, known as non-terminals, represent phrasal categories or syntactic variables that expand into further constituents via production rules. Leaf nodes, labeled with terminals, correspond to the words or lexical items of the input string. Parent-child relationships establish the dominance hierarchy, where each non-root node has exactly one parent, and branches denote the immediate expansions from a parent to its children, illustrating how a non-terminal derives a sequence of symbols as per a rule like $ A \to BC $. Subtrees form the recursive building blocks, consisting of a node and all its descendants, capturing local syntactic units.
In graph-theoretic terms, a parse tree is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with ordered children, featuring a single root and no directed cycles, which guarantees a finite, hierarchical expansion without loops. Edges from parent to child nodes encode the application of production rules, directing the derivation from abstract categories to concrete terminals. This DAG structure ensures that every path from the root to a leaf corresponds to a valid partial derivation, maintaining acyclicity to prevent infinite regressions in the grammar.
The yield of a parse tree is the string obtained by concatenating the labels of its leaf nodes in left-to-right order, which exactly matches the original input sequence generated by the grammar. This property confirms the tree's fidelity to the derivation, linking the abstract structure back to the surface form.
A key concept in parse trees is ambiguity, where a single input string permits multiple valid derivations, each corresponding to a distinct parse tree that reveals different syntactic interpretations. In formal language theory, particularly for context-free grammars with binary branching, the number of distinct full binary parse trees for a string with n leaves is quantified by the (n-1)th Catalan number:
Cn1=1n(2n2n1)
C_{n-1} = \frac{1}{n} \binom{2n-2}{n-1}
Cn1=n1(n12n2)
This counts the possible ways to parenthesize or hierarchically structure n terminals under binary rules. The formula derives from the recursive definition of Catalan numbers, $ C_0 = 1 $ and $ C_k = \sum_{i=0}^{k-1} C_i C_{k-1-i} $ for $ k \geq 1 $ with $ k = n-1 $, which mirrors the tree's bifurcation: the root's left subtree spans the first $ i+1 $ leaves and the right spans the remaining $ n - i - 1 $ leaves, summing over all split points $ i $. Solving this recurrencevia ordinary generating functions, where the generating function $ C(x) = \sum_{k=0}^{\infty} C_k x^k $ satisfies $ C(x) = 1 + x C(x)^2 $, leading to $ C(x) = \frac{1 - \sqrt{1-4x}}{2x} $yields the closed-form binomial expression, establishing the combinatorial explosion of parses in ambiguous grammars. These terms apply to constituency parse trees, providing nomenclature for syntactic analysis in context-free grammars.

Constituency Parse Trees

Structure

A constituency parse tree, also known as a phrase structure tree, represents the syntactic structure of a sentence as a hierarchical tree based on a context-free grammar (CFG). In this tree, the root node is labeled with the start symbol (typically S for sentence), interior nodes are labeled with nonterminal symbols representing syntactic constituents or phrases (e.g., NP for noun phrase, VP for verb phrase), and the leaf nodes are labeled with terminal symbols, which are the words of the sentence in order. The children of each nonterminal node correspond to the right-hand side of a production rule in the CFG, ordered from left to right.
The tree structure captures nested phrases, where larger constituents are composed of smaller ones, reflecting the hierarchical organization of language. For example, a noun phrase (NP) might expand to a determiner (DT) followed by a noun (NN), and a sentence (S) to a noun phrase (NP) followed by a verb phrase (VP). Formally, a CFG is defined as a tuple (N, , S, R), where N is the set of nonterminals, is the set of terminals (words), S is the start symbol, and R is the set of production rules like A , with A N and (N )*. The yield of the treethe concatenation of the leaf labelsmust match the input sentence. Unlike dependency trees, constituency trees emphasize phrase boundaries and grouping rather than direct word dependencies.
Constituency trees are often constructed using bottom-up parsing algorithms like the Cocke-Kasami-Younger (CKY) algorithm, which builds the tree incrementally by filling a dynamic programming table for spans of the sentence. In Chomsky Normal Form (CNF), production rules are binary (A B C) or unary (A w), facilitating efficient parsing with O(n^3) time complexity for a sentence of length n. Probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs) extend this by assigning probabilities to rules, allowing for the most likely parse among ambiguous ones.

Examples

A simple example is the sentence "The man sleeps." The constituency parse tree can be represented textually as:
S
/ \
NP VP
/ \ |
DT NN V
| | |
The man sleeps
Here, the production rules applied include S NP VP, NP DT NN, and VP V (where V is a verb). This structure groups "The man" as a noun phrase and "sleeps" as a verb phrase.
For a more complex sentence, consider "The man saw the woman with the telescope." One possible parse (resolving ambiguity by attaching the prepositional phrase to the verb phrase) is:
S
/ \
NP VP
/ \ /|\
DT NN V NP PP
| | | / \ / \
The man saw DT NN IN DT NN
| | the woman with the telescope
Productions include S NP VP, VP V NP PP, NP DT NN (twice), and PP IN NP. This tree shows nesting: the object NP "the woman" is modified by the PP "with the telescope." Ambiguity arises if the PP attaches to the NP instead, as in "saw ]," leading to two distinct trees for the same string.
In the Penn Treebank format, a standard encoding for constituency parses, trees are represented in bracketed notation, such as (S (NP (DT The) (NN man)) (VP (VBD saw) (NP (DT the) (NN woman)) (PP (IN with) (NP (DT the) (NN telescope))))) for the example above.

Dependency Parse Trees

Structure

A dependency parse tree represents the syntactic structure of a sentence as a directed graph in which all nodes correspond to the words (terminals) in the sentence, and edges denote dependency relations between them. Unlike constituency trees, this structure avoids intermediate phrasal nodes, directly linking words via head-dependent pairs to capture grammatical relationships.
The core components include the head (also called the governor), which is the primary word governing the relation, and the dependent (subordinate), which modifies or complements the head. Arcs are the directed edges connecting these, labeled with specific relation types such as "nsubj" for nominal subject. The Universal Dependencies (UD) framework standardizes these labels into a scheme of 37 universal syntactic relations, ensuring cross-linguistic consistency. The tree has a single root, typically the main predicate (e.g., the main verb), which depends on a notional ROOT node to form a complete arborescence.
Key properties define the tree's organization: each dependent has exactly one head, ensuring a tree structure without cycles or multiple parents, distinguishing it from general graphs. Projectivity requires that arcs do not cross when the sentence is linearized in surface word order, meaning the subtree of any head includes all words between the head and its dependent. Valence refers to the number of dependents attached to a head, with core arguments (e.g., subjects and objects) distinguished from oblique modifiers. Non-projective dependencies, where arcs cross, occur more frequently in languages with free word order, such as Czech, allowing for more flexible syntactic representations.
Formally, a dependency tree can be represented as a tuple (W, A, R), where W is the set of words (nodes), A is the set of directed arcs (head-dependent pairs), and R assigns relation labels to each arc. Parsing such trees typically employs transition-based algorithms, which build the structure incrementally via shift-reduce operations, or graph-based methods, which optimize over all possible arcs using maximum spanning tree algorithms.

Examples

A simple illustration of a dependency parse tree is the English sentence "John hit the ball," where "hit" serves as the root verb, "John" attaches as the nominal subject (nsubj), "ball" as the direct object (obj), and "the" as the determiner (det) of "ball." This structure captures the head-dependent relations using directed edges from head to dependent, forming a tree with no cycles.
Textually, the dependencies can be represented as an arc diagram: John --nsubj--> hit <--obj-- ball, with the --det--> ball branching from the object. In the CoNLL-U format, a standard for encoding such parses, the sentence appears as follows (with columns for ID, form, lemma, universal part-of-speech tag, head ID, and dependency relation):
# text = John hit the (/page/Ball) .
1	John	John	_	2	nsubj	_	_
2	hit	hit	_	0	root	_	_
3	the	the	_	4	det	_	_
4	ball	ball	_	2	obj	_	_
5	.	.	_	2	punct	_	_

For a more complex case, dependency trees in English are typically projective, meaning no dependency arcs cross in the linear word order, as in "John hit the ball." In contrast, German often exhibits non-projective trees due to flexible word order, such as verb-final clauses or relative extractions, leading to crossing dependencies; for example, in the sentence "Der Autokonvoi mit den Probenbesuchern fhrt eine Strae entlang, die noch heute Lagerstrae heit." (The convoy of the rehearsal visitors cars goes along a street that is still called Lagerstrae today.), the relative clause "die noch heute Lagerstrae heit" attaches to "Strae" but is extraposed after "entlang", causing the dependency arc to cross over the verb "fhrt" and the prepositional phrase.
In error cases, ill-formed sentences lacking a clear rootsuch as fragments without a main verb, e.g., "approximately 200"may result in incomplete parses where no single word can serve as the root, requiring parsers to insert null elements or assign artificial roots to maintain tree validity.

Representations and Variants

Phrase Markers

Phrase markers represent a key notational device in generative linguistics for depicting the hierarchical structure of sentences, particularly the deep structure in transformational grammar, using either labeled bracketing or diagrammatic trees. Introduced by Noam Chomsky in his seminal work on syntax, they serve to illustrate the underlying syntactic relations before the application of transformational rules that derive surface forms.
The structure of phrase markers relies on nested, labeled brackets to denote phrasal constituents, as exemplified in the simple declarative sentence "The cat sleeps":
 ]
This notation captures the sentence (S) as comprising a noun phrase (NP) subject and a verb phrase (VP). In cases involving movement transformations, such as wh-questions, phrase markers incorporate traces (t) to mark the original position of displaced elements; for instance, in "What did the cat eat?":
 eat t_i ]]
Here, the wh-phrase "what" moves to the sentence-initial position, leaving a trace in the object slot of the VP.
Within X-bar theory, phrase markers formalize the universal template for phrasal organization, positing that every phrase (XP) expands from a head (X^0) through an intermediate level (X')which may include a complementand a maximal projection incorporating a specifier. This three-tiered structure, first outlined by Chomsky and elaborated by Jackendoff, ensures endocentricity, where phrases are headed by a single lexical category, distinguishing phrase markers from surface parse trees that reflect post-transformational configurations without such underlying projections.
Phrase markers evolved significantly across generative paradigms: from the base structures of early transformational models in the 1960s, to the inclusion of empty categories like traces and PRO (for non-finite subjects) in the 1981 Government and Binding framework, and onward to the 1990s minimalist program, which streamlined representations to prioritize computational efficiency and interface with semantic and phonological systems.
Formally, converting a tree-based phrase marker to a bracketed string proceeds recursively by labeling and enclosing subtrees from leaves upward, while parsing a bracketed string reconstructs the tree by iteratively matching closing brackets to their labeled openings and attaching them hierarchically.

Bracketed and Linear Notations

Bracketed notation provides a compact textual representation of constituency parse trees by using nested parentheses to encode the hierarchical structure, where each non-terminal label is followed by its subconstituents. For example, the parse tree for the sentence "I saw the dog" might be expressed as (S (NP (Pro I)) (VP (V saw) (NP (Det the) (N dog)))). This format mirrors the tree's preorder traversal, starting with the root label and recursively enclosing child subtrees.
In practice, bracketed notation is widely adopted in annotated corpora for its storage efficiency and ease of automated processing. The Penn Treebank, for instance, employs this LISP-inspired parenthesized format to represent over 4.5 million words of syntactically parsed English text from sources like the Wall Street Journal (WSJ), enabling large-scale training and evaluation of statistical parsers. A more detailed example from the Penn Treebank for "That cold empty sky was full of fire and light." appears as ((S (NP-SBJ (DT That) (JJ cold) (, ,) (JJ empty) (NN sky)) (VP (VBD was) (ADJP-PRD (JJ full) (PP (IN of) (NP (NN fire) (CC and) (NN light))))) (. .))).
While bracketed notation excels in compactnessfacilitating efficient serialization for machine learning datasets like the WSJ corpus used in parser trainingit can reduce human readability for deeply nested or complex structures compared to graphical depictions. Conversely, its simplicity supports straightforward algorithmic conversion from tree structures via preorder traversal, where the root is output first, followed by recursive calls on children.
For dependency parse trees, linear notations offer a non-nested alternative, typically in tabular formats that list each word's head and relation. The CoNLL-U format, standard in Universal Dependencies treebanks, structures data across 10 tab-separated columns per word, including ID, form, head index, and dependency relation. An example for "They buy and sell books." is:
IDFORMLEMMAUPOSXPOSFEATSHEADDEPRELDEPSMISC
1TheytheyPRON_Case=Nom|Number=Plur2nsubj__
2buybuyVERB_Number=Plur|Person=3|Tense=Pres0root__
3andandCCONJ__4cc__
4sellsellVERB_Number=Plur|Person=3|Tense=Pres2conj__
5booksbookNOUN_Number=Plur4obj__
6..PUNCT__4punct__
This line-based representation allows quick parsing of dependencies without parentheses, though it requires additional metadata lines for sentence boundaries.
A variant of bracketed notation is the Lisp-style s-expression, which uses the same nested parenthetical structure but is optimized for programmatic manipulation in Lisp environments, treating code and parse trees as interchangeable list data. Phrase markers represent a specialized application of this notation within generative linguistics frameworks.

Comparisons and Related Structures

Differences Between Constituency and Dependency

Constituency parse trees represent the syntactic structure of a sentence through a hierarchical organization of phrases, using non-terminal nodes to denote categories such as noun phrases (NP) or verb phrases (VP), which group words into constituents based on context-free grammar rules. In contrast, dependency parse trees depict the syntactic relations as a directed graph connecting words (terminals only) directly to their heads, emphasizing predicate-argument structures without intermediate phrase levels, resulting in a flatter representation.
Constituency parsing excels in modeling long-distance dependencies and scope ambiguities, such as those in nested clauses or quantifier scoping, due to its explicit hierarchical layering that aligns well with phrase-structure grammars. However, it requires defining non-terminal categories, which can vary across languages and lead to annotation inconsistencies. Dependency parsing, by focusing solely on head-dependent arcs, offers simplicity in labeling relations and greater cross-lingual applicability, as demonstrated by the Universal Dependencies (UD) framework introduced in 2014, which standardizes dependency annotations across 186 languages as of November 2025. A disadvantage of dependency parsing is its limited ability to directly capture multi-word units or flat structures without additional enhancements, potentially complicating analyses of phrasal coordination.
Algorithms exist to convert between the two representations, enabling interoperability. To project a constituency tree to a dependency tree, head rulessuch as those defined by Collins (1999)are applied to select a head word within each constituent and propagate dependencies downward, effectively collapsing the hierarchy into arcs. Conversely, converting a dependency tree to a constituency tree involves techniques like grammar induction or spine-based reconstruction, often leveraging Chomsky normal form to derive binary branching structures from dependency arcs, though this can introduce approximations in non-projective cases.
Empirically, as of 2025, state-of-the-art models for both dependency and constituency parsing achieve high accuracies on English benchmarks, with dependency parsers reaching around 95% labeled attachment score (LAS) on Universal Dependencies English treebanks and constituency parsers attaining 96.47 F1 on the Penn Treebank; recent advances with large language models have made their performances comparable. This parity stems from improvements in both graph-based and LLM-enhanced models.
Hybrid approaches combine elements of both to leverage their strengths, such as joint models that predict constituency spans alongside dependency arcs in a single framework, improving overall parsing robustness in multilingual settings. For example, reranking techniques integrate outputs from separate constituency and dependency parsers to refine predictions, yielding marginal gains in accuracy for both representations.

Relation to Abstract Syntax Trees

An abstract syntax tree (AST) is a tree representation of the abstract syntactic structure of source code, which captures the essential hierarchical organization of the program while omitting insignificant details such as parentheses, whitespace, and explicit punctuation that do not affect the program's meaning. Unlike a parse tree, which faithfully reflects the concrete syntax derived directly from the grammar rules during parsing, an AST simplifies this structure to focus on semantic intent, making it more suitable for subsequent compiler phases like semantic analysis and code generation.
The primary relation between parse trees and ASTs is one of derivation and abstraction: a parse tree serves as the initial, detailed output of the parser, from which an AST is constructed by pruning redundant nodes and reorganizing elements to eliminate grammar-specific artifacts. For instance, in a parse tree for the expression "a + b * c" under a grammar with operator precedence, the structure might include intermediate nodes for the multiplication before addition, but the AST would directly represent the binary operations with the multiplication as a subtree under addition, ignoring any grouping symbols. This transformation ensures the AST encodes the program's logical structure unambiguously for execution, whereas parse trees in linguistics often highlight syntactic ambiguities in natural language, such as multiple valid derivations for a phrase like "I saw the man with the telescope," which would require resolution not present in programming contexts where grammars are designed to be deterministic.
In compiler design, the conversion from parse tree to AST typically occurs as a post-parsing step through syntax-directed translation, where semantic actionsembedded in tools like Yaccexecute code during parsing to build the AST incrementally by attaching attributes and constructing nodes on the fly. These actions, often specified in the grammar productions, allow for efficient tree construction without materializing the full parse tree in memory, as described in standard compiler texts.
In modern extensions for statically typed languages, ASTs are augmented with type information during semantic analysis, incorporating annotations for variable types, function signatures, and inference results that are entirely absent from the original parse tree, enabling further optimizations and error checking. This evolution bridges syntactic parsing with deeper semantic processing, distinguishing ASTs as a foundational intermediate representation in contemporary compiler pipelines.

Applications

Natural Language Processing

In natural language processing, parse trees serve as foundational representations for syntactic parsing, which decomposes sentences into hierarchical structures to support downstream tasks including machine translation, where they inform reordering and alignment models; sentiment analysis, by capturing phrase-level dependencies for polarity detection; and question answering, by facilitating the extraction of syntactic relations for answer retrieval. These structures enable models to reason over grammatical relations, improving the interpretability and accuracy of natural language understanding systems.
Early algorithmic approaches to constituency parsing relied on probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs), with the Cocke-Kasami-Younger (CKY) algorithm providing a dynamic programming solution that fills a chart table in O(n^3) time to identify valid parses under Chomsky normal form. For dependency parsing, transition-based methods emerged prominently in the 2000s, exemplified by the arc-standard system, which uses a stack and buffer to build directed graphs through shift, left-arc, and right-arc operations in linear time, suitable for resource-constrained environments. Key evaluation metrics for these parsers include the labeled attachment score (LAS), which measures the percentage of words correctly assigned both a head and a dependency label, and constituency F1, which assesses the overlap between predicted and gold-standard phrase structures. Influential corpora underpinning these methods are the Penn Treebank, initially released in 1993 with over 4.5 million words of annotated English text including skeletal parse trees, and the Universal Dependencies framework, launched in 2014 and expanded through community efforts to provide cross-linguistically consistent dependency annotations for over 100 languages.
Advancements since 2018 have shifted toward neural architectures, with BERT-based parsers integrating contextualized embeddings to enhance feature representation and achieve state-of-the-art performance on both constituency and dependency tasks. Graph neural networks have further enabled modeling of non-projective dependencieswhere arcs cross without violating tree constraintsby propagating information across graph edges, yielding state-of-the-art performance, with unlabeled attachment scores (UAS) often exceeding 95% and labeled attachment scores (LAS) around 93-95% on benchmarks like the Universal Dependencies treebanks in evaluations as of 2024. More recently, large language models (LLMs) have been employed for zero-shot and few-shot syntactic parsing, achieving competitive results without task-specific training. Despite these gains, challenges persist in handling syntactic ambiguity, where multiple valid parses exist for the same sentence due to structural underspecification, and in low-resource languages, where limited annotated data hinders model training and leads to degraded performance compared to high-resource settings like English.

Compiler Design

In compiler design, parse trees play a central role in the front-end phase, where source code is analyzed for syntactic correctness using context-free grammars, typically implemented via top-down LL parsers or bottom-up LR parsers. These parsers construct a parse tree by matching the input token stream against grammar productions, ensuring the code adheres to the language's syntax rules before proceeding to semantic analysis. The resulting parse tree represents the hierarchical structure of the program, enabling subsequent phases to traverse it for type checking, scope resolution, and other analyses.
A key process involving parse trees is syntax-directed translation (SDT), which embeds semantic actions within the grammar to attach attributes or generate intermediate code directly during parsing. In SDT schemes, actions are executed as the parse tree is built, often in a bottom-up manner for LR parsers, allowing for efficient computation of synthesized attributes like expression values or symbol table entries. Error recovery mechanisms, such as panic-mode recovery, further enhance robustness by synchronizing the parser at designated points in the parse tree after detecting syntax errors in malformed code, minimizing the impact on overall compilation. Parser generators like ANTLR and Bison automate this by taking grammar specifications as input and producing code that builds parse trees, which can then drive code generation in the back-end.
Parse trees serve as an intermediate representation before transformation into abstract syntax trees (ASTs), stripping away grammar-specific details like non-terminals to focus on the program's semantic structure. In handling operator precedence and associativity, recursive descent parsersoften hand-crafted for LL grammarsexplicitly encode these rules through nested function calls that build the parse tree, ensuring correct grouping (e.g., left-associativity for subtraction in expressions like a - b - c). Modern compilers and integrated development environments (IDEs), such as Visual Studio Code, leverage incremental parsing techniques post-2020 to update parse trees efficiently after code edits, enabling real-time syntax highlighting and error checking without full re-parsing.

References

 Context-Free Languages and Parse Trees - cs.wisc.edu

None

 Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools

 Context-Free Grammars and Constituency Parsing

 Lecture Notes on Context-Free Grammars

 Chapter 3 Context-Free Grammars, Context-Free Languages, Parse ...

Parse Tree - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

 5 Context-Free Languages and Grammars

 Noam Chomsky Syntactic Structures - Tal Linzen

 Parse trees: from formal to natural languages

 Introduction to Syntax and Parsing - CS@Purdue

Grammars and parsing - CS 12 Spring 2023

Parse Trees

Grammars and Parsing - Cornell: Computer Science

 Introduction to Parsing (adapted from CS 164 at Berkeley)

9. Trees and directed acyclic graphs

 Parse Trees - Stanford InfoLab

 Statistical Natural Language Parsing

 Advanced Human Language Technologies Exercises on Parsing

Syntax: General Principles - Universal Dependencies

 Dependency Parsing - Stanford University

Universal Dependencies

Universal Dependencies | Computational Linguistics | MIT Press

CoNLL-U Format - Universal Dependencies

 Non-Projective Dependency Parsing using Spanning Tree Algorithms

Mildly Non-Projective Dependency Grammar - MIT Press Direct

Syntactic parsing of clinical text: guideline and corpus development ...

Aspects of the Theory of Syntax - MIT Press

 Noam Chomsky

 chomsky-remarks-1970.pdf - GLOW Linguistics

X Syntax - MIT Press

Lectures on Government and Binding - De Gruyter Brill

The Minimalist Program - MIT Press

nltk.tree package

 Constituency Grammars - Stanford University

 Constituency Parsing - Stanford University

 Dependency Parsing - Stanford University

 An Empirical Evaluation of Automatic Conversion from Constituency ...

Universal Dependencies

 A Hybrid Constituency-Dependency Parser for Swedish

Dependency parsing - NLP-progress

Constituency parsing - NLP-progress

 One-Step Statistical Parsing of Hybrid Dependency-Constituency ...

 Combine Constituent and Dependency Parsing via Reranking - IJCAI

CS 12 Spring 2021 - CS@Cornell

 CIS 341: COMPILERS

 CSE 12: Abstract Syntax Trees

Step 2, ASTs and Code Generation ECE 468/573/595

12 Abstract Syntax and Parsing - CSCI 3155

 COP5621 Programming Project Part II: Syntax analysis

 Dragon-book.pdf - School of Information Science and Technology

 A Generic Abstract Syntax Model for Embedded Languages

 Training a Parser for Machine Translation Reordering - ACL Anthology

 A Statistical Parsing Framework for Sentiment Classification

 Parsing and Question Classification for Question Answering

 Efficient Constituency Tree based Encoding for Natural Language to ...

 Probabilistic Context Free Grammars

 Graph-based Dependency Parsing with Graph Neural Networks

Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank

Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual Treebank Collection

 Deep Contextualized Word Embeddings in Transition-Based and ...

 Who Relies More on World Knowledge and Bias for Syntactic ...

 Parsing - CS143 Notes - Stanford University

 CS 132 Compiler Construction - UCLA Computer Science

 LR Parsing

Syntax-Directed Translation - cs.wisc.edu

 CS143 Lecture 6

Compilers Lecture #5 - NYU Computer Science

ANTLR

 Compilers - Computer Science

ASTs and errors - CS 12 Spring 2022 - Cornell University

 Principles of Programming Some Notes on Grammars and Parsing

 Recursive-Descent Parsing - UAF CS

 Design and Implementation of the Language Server Protocol for the ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion