Pattern matching Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 20 days ago 
Pattern matching
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Pattern matching is a fundamental concept in computer science that involves the algorithmic process of identifying and locating specific patterns within sequences of data, such as strings of characters or more complex structures like trees and objects. In its classical form, known as string matching, it focuses on finding all occurrences of a shorter pattern string within a longer text string, enabling efficient searching and retrieval. This technique underpins a wide range of applications, including text processing, data compression, and bioinformatics.
Beyond string matching, pattern matching extends to structural pattern matching in programming languages, where it allows developers to destructure and match against the shape and contents of data structures, such as lists, tuples, or classes, while binding variables to subparts for concise conditional logic. This feature, prominent in functional programming paradigms, simplifies code for tasks like parsing and case analysis, as seen in languages like Haskell, Scala, and more recently Python's match statement introduced in version 3.10. Structural matching supports nested patterns, wildcards, and guards, making it powerful for handling complex data without verbose if-else chains.
The development of efficient pattern matching algorithms has been pivotal since the 1970s, with seminal work like the Knuth-Morris-Pratt (KMP) algorithm achieving linear-time performance for string matching by preprocessing the pattern to avoid redundant comparisons. Other notable algorithms, such as Boyer-Moore, optimize skips based on character mismatches for faster practical performance on large texts. These advancements have broad implications in areas like compiler design, where pattern matching validates syntax and generates code, and in security, enabling secure searches in sensitive databases without revealing underlying data.
In modern contexts, pattern matching intersects with machine learning and AI, where it aids in motif discovery in genomic sequences or anomaly detection in network traffic, highlighting its enduring relevance across computational domains.

Fundamentals

Core Concepts

Pattern matching is a computational technique in programming languages that involves comparing input data against predefined patterns to determine matches, bind variables to parts of the data, or decompose complex structures into simpler components. This mechanism allows programmers to inspect the shape and content of data in a declarative way, facilitating the extraction of relevant information while performing tests on its structure. As a core feature particularly prominent in functional programming paradigms, pattern matching serves as a foundational tool for data analysis and manipulation.
One key advantage of pattern matching is its ability to combine testing and destructuring into a single operation, enabling more concise and readable expressions of algorithms compared to traditional conditional branching or explicit data extraction. For example, in simple value matching, an integer input can be compared against literal constants like 1 or 2, triggering specific computations only when an exact match occurs. This approach reduces boilerplate code and improves clarity by aligning the program's logic directly with the data's expected forms.
Unlike mere equality checks, which only verify if two values are identical without further decomposition, pattern matching supports partial matches and variable bindings to enable flexible data handling. For instance, when processing a pair of values, pattern matching can bind the first element to a variable x and the second to y, allowing these bound values to be used in subsequent operations without additional assignment statements. This destructuring capability extends to more complex structures, promoting efficient and intuitive code.
Pattern matching also plays a crucial role in enhancing type safety and error handling, particularly through exhaustive matching requirements that ensure all possible input cases are explicitly addressed. In languages that enforce exhaustiveness, compilers verify that patterns cover the entire domain of possible values, preventing runtime errors from unhandled scenarios and thereby bolstering program reliability. This feature integrates seamlessly with type systems to detect mismatches early, contributing to robust software design.

Key Terminology

In pattern matching, a pattern serves as a template or syntactic form that specifies the structure expected in the input data for a successful match, enabling the decomposition and inspection of values against predefined shapes. The matcher refers to the evaluation mechanism, typically implemented as a control structure like a match expression, which sequentially compares the input value against a series of patterns to select the appropriate branch for execution. During a match, binding occurs when a pattern variable is assigned the corresponding subvalue from the input, making it available for use in the associated expression or body. A guard provides an additional boolean condition attached to a pattern, refining the match by requiring the condition to evaluate to true alongside structural compatibility, thus allowing more precise control over branching logic.
Exhaustive matching requires that the set of patterns in a matching construct covers all possible input values for the given type, preventing runtime errors from unmatched cases and ensuring completeness in program behavior. The wildcard, often denoted as _, is a special pattern that matches any input value without performing any binding, serving as a catch-all for irrelevant or default cases.
A common confusion arises between patterns and regular expressions, the former being a more general mechanism applicable to structured data like trees or algebraic types beyond linear strings, whereas the latter are specialized for textual sequence matching.

Types of Patterns

Primitive Patterns

Primitive patterns represent the foundational elements of pattern matching, consisting of simple constructs that match against basic values without involving composite or hierarchical structures. These include literals, which are exact value matches such as integers, booleans, or other atomic types; variables, which bind to any input value for subsequent use; and constants, which are predefined non-variable literals that enforce precise equality checks. Literals and constants ensure strict equivalence, while variables provide flexibility by capturing and naming values during the match.
These primitive patterns serve as the building blocks for more sophisticated matching mechanisms, where they can be combined or extended to handle complex data through nesting or additional rules. In essence, advanced patterns decompose into sequences of primitive evaluations, allowing compilers to optimize the overall process by leveraging the simplicity of atomic matches.
A basic example of primitive pattern matching can be illustrated in pseudocode as follows:
case x of
 0 -> "zero"
 _ -> "non-zero"
end
Here, the literal 0 matches exactly, while the wildcard _ (a special unbound variable) captures all other cases without binding.
The primary advantages of primitive patterns lie in their efficiency during compilation and execution; they translate directly into simple if-then-else chains or jump tables, minimizing overhead and enabling fast dispatch for atomic decisions. This approach avoids redundant testing and supports straightforward optimization in decision trees.
However, primitive patterns have inherent limitations, as they cannot natively address nested or recursive data structures, requiring extensions like constructor matching or guards to handle such cases effectively.

Structural and Tree Patterns

Structural patterns in pattern matching refer to mechanisms that decompose compound data structures by specifying their constituent components, such as tuples, records, or lists represented as cons cells. For instance, a list can be matched by deconstructing it into a head element and a tail sublist, allowing recursive processing of the structure. This approach enables precise inspection and binding of subparts without explicit indexing or accessors, promoting safer and more expressive data handling.
Tree patterns extend structural matching to handle recursive and hierarchical data types, particularly algebraic data types that define variants like leaves and nodes. These patterns facilitate the deconstruction of nested structures, such as binary trees, by recursively applying matches to subtrees. A canonical example involves defining a binary tree type with constructors Leaf for terminal nodes holding a value and Node for internal nodes containing a left subtree, a value, and a right subtree; pattern matching then processes such a tree by cases: binding the value for Leaf or recursively matching the left and right subtrees for Node.
To enhance flexibility, pattern matching incorporates or-patterns, which allow alternatives within a single branch by specifying multiple disjoint subpatterns that a value can satisfy, and as-patterns, which bind a variable to the entire matched structure while simultaneously applying a subpattern for further decomposition. Or-patterns support nondeterministic choice between patterns, enabling factorization of similar cases, while as-patterns provide access to the whole value alongside partial matches, avoiding redundant recomputation.
Theoretically, structural and tree patterns draw from term rewriting systems, where matching substitutes variables in left-hand sides of rules to apply transformations to terms, and relate to lambda calculus through shared properties like confluence, ensuring unique normal forms under certain conditions. These foundations underpin the computational model for decomposing and reconstructing complex data hierarchies.

Language Implementations

In Functional Languages

In functional programming languages, pattern matching serves as a core mechanism for destructuring and analyzing algebraic data types, enabling concise and expressive code. Haskell exemplifies this through its support for pattern matching in case expressions and function definitions, where patterns are matched against values to bind variables or select alternatives. For instance, a function definition like fact 0 = 1; fact n = n * fact (n-1) uses patterns to handle the base case recursively without explicit conditionals. Haskell also integrates guardsboolean conditions attached to patterns in function equations or case alternativesto refine matching, such as fact n | n < 0 = error "Negative!". Due to Haskell's lazy evaluation semantics, patterns are typically irrefutable unless made strict, allowing unevaluated thunks to participate in matching and supporting non-strict computations in recursive definitions.
OCaml provides pattern matching primarily via match expressions, which exhaustively branch on a value against a series of patterns, each followed by an expression to evaluate on a match. This integrates seamlessly with variant types (sum types) and records, allowing patterns like match shape with Circle r -> ... | Rectangle (w, h) -> ... to destructure constructors and bind components directly. For records, patterns such as {width = w; height = h} extract fields while permitting partial matching with _ for unused ones. The OCaml compiler performs static exhaustiveness checking on match expressions, issuing warnings for non-exhaustive patterns to prevent runtime failures, as in cases where a variant constructor is omitted.
Other functional languages extend pattern matching to domain-specific contexts. In Scala, extractorsobjects with an unapply methodenable custom pattern matching on non-algebraic types, such as case Email(user, domain) => ... for parsing strings, while for-comprehensions incorporate patterns for iterating and filtering collections like for (x <- list if x > 0) yield x. Erlang employs pattern matching in receive clauses for selective message processing in concurrent actors, where clauses like receive {ping, Pid} -> Pid ! pong end bind incoming messages to variables only if they match the pattern, facilitating fault-tolerant distributed systems.
Pattern matching aligns with functional paradigms by promoting immutable data handling, as it deconstructs structures without modification, ensuring referential transparency in expressions. It reduces boilerplate in recursive algorithms, such as list processing, by allowing base and inductive cases to be defined declarativelye.g., Haskell's sum = 0; sum (x:xs) = x + sum xsavoiding explicit loops or conditionals.
Functional language compilers translate pattern matches to efficient decision trees, optimizing for runtime performance by constructing compact representations that minimize tests. Luc Maranget's algorithm, applied in ML-family compilers like OCaml, uses heuristics inspired by lazy evaluation necessities to build decision trees as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) with maximal sharing, ensuring competitive code size and speed compared to earlier optimizers.

In Other Paradigms

In imperative languages, pattern matching often enhances control flow constructs like switch statements by allowing decomposition of data structures alongside value comparison. For instance, C++17 introduced structured bindings, which enable the decomposition of aggregates such as tuples, arrays, or structs into individual variables within a single declaration, facilitating concise handling of compound data in procedural code. This feature builds toward more expressive pattern matching in ongoing proposals, such as P2688R5 (January 2025), which proposes a match expression to support inspector patterns and other advanced features for safer and more readable imperative algorithms; however, full pattern matching remains under discussion and is not yet part of the C++ standard. Similarly, Python 3.10 added the match statement and case blocks, allowing structural pattern matching on sequences, mappings, and objects to simplify imperative data processing tasks like command parsing. For example, a match can bind variables from a list input, such as case : to handle variable-length arguments in a loop-driven program.
In object-oriented languages, pattern matching integrates with type checking and polymorphism to reduce boilerplate in handling hierarchies. Java, starting with preview features in JDK 17 and stabilized in JDK 21 via JEP 441, extends switch expressions and statements to support patterns that combine type tests with variable binding, often alongside instanceof. Additionally, as a preview feature in JDK 21 via JEP 443, unnamed patterns and variables were introduced, allowing the use of the underscore _ as an unnamed pattern variable to ignore variables in switch pattern matching without binding a name. Examples include case String _ -> ... (ignores the String value), case Point(int x, _) -> ... (ignores the second component), and case Freelancer _ -> ... (ignores the Freelancer binding). This is enabled with the --enable-preview flag and is part of unnamed patterns and variables, separate from but compatible with pattern matching for switch (JEP 441). Subsequent enhancements include finalization of unnamed variables and patterns in JDK 22 (JEP 456) and preview support for primitive types in patterns, instanceof, and switch starting in JDK 23 and continuing as third preview in JDK 25 (JEP 507). This allows concise deconstruction of objects, such as case String s -> process(s.length()), which implicitly checks the type and binds the variable, streamlining OO code for event handling or API responses. The integration eliminates repetitive instanceof guards followed by casts, promoting safer polymorphism in mutable state management.
Declarative paradigms, particularly logic programming, employ unification as a foundational form of pattern matching to resolve queries against knowledge bases. In Prolog, unification matches terms by finding substitutions that make them identical, binding variables to values or structures during clause resolution. For example, the query location(X, kitchen) = location(apple, kitchen) unifies to bind X to apple, enabling declarative rule inference without explicit loops or conditionals. This process, driven by the built-in =/2 predicate, supports backtracking for exhaustive search in non-deterministic computations.
Hybrid languages like Rust incorporate pattern matching into their core control flow to enforce memory safety amid imperative and functional influences. The match expression destructures enums and other types exhaustively, ensuring all variants are handled at compile time. For enums representing states, such as enum IpAddr { V4(u8,u8,u8,u8), V6((/page/String)) }, a match can bind components like IpAddr::V4(a,b,c,d) => format!("{}.{}.{}.{}", a,b,c,d), while adhering to borrowing rules that prevent data races by scoping mutable access. This design allows safe mutation within armssuch as borrowing mutably for one variantwithout violating ownership, contrasting with unrestricted side effects in pure imperatives.
Unlike the expression-oriented, side-effect-free purity of functional implementations, pattern matching in these paradigms typically emphasizes procedural integration, where matches may trigger mutable operations or interact with imperative control structures like loops and exceptions. In such contexts, features like guards (e.g., Python's if clauses) or type guards (e.g., Java's implicit instanceof) accommodate mutable state and runtime checks, prioritizing robustness in mixed-paradigm codebases.

Applications

Data Filtering and Processing

Pattern matching serves as a powerful mechanism for filtering data in collections such as lists or streams by enabling concise case analysis to partition elements based on their structure or values. For instance, in functional languages, it allows developers to separate even and odd numbers in a list through a case expression that matches the head of the list and recurses on the tail, avoiding explicit conditional loops. This approach promotes declarative code where the focus is on the desired outcome rather than imperative iteration steps.
In processing pipelines, pattern matching facilitates chaining operations like mapping, folding, or querying by destructuring complex data structures, such as JSON-like objects, directly within function definitions. This destructuring extracts nested fields while handling variants, enabling transformations such as computing aggregates or validating properties in a single pass. For example, a fold operation might match a list of records to accumulate sums only for entries satisfying a structural condition, streamlining data aggregation without auxiliary variables.
A representative example involves filtering a list of geometric shapes using structural patterns on case classes or algebraic data types. Consider the following pseudocode in a Scala-like syntax, where shapes are defined as variants (e.g., Circle with radius, Rectangle with width and height), and the filter selects circles with radius greater than 5:
def filterLargeCircles(shapes: List): List = shapes.flatMap {
 case Circle(r) if r > 5 => List(Circle(r))
 case _ => Nil
}
This leverages structural matching to inspect type and properties, returning only qualifying elements while discarding others efficiently.
Pattern matching integrates seamlessly with higher-order functions, such as those in map-reduce paradigms, where it can be embedded in lambda expressions to process elements conditionally. For example, in a map operation over a stream, a pattern-matched lambda might destructure each item to apply transformations based on its shape, enhancing readability in distributed data processing contexts like querying datasets.
Regarding performance, pattern matching often compiles to optimized dispatch mechanisms, such as decision trees or jump tables, which can outperform traditional loops in scenarios involving frequent type checks or destructuring, as the compiler eliminates redundant comparisons through static analysis. This results in constant-time access for common cases, though complexity grows with the number of patterns, typically analyzed in O(n m c^m) time during compilation where n is clauses, m patterns, and c constructors.

String and Text Matching

String pattern matching involves techniques for identifying substrings or sequences within textual data that conform to specified patterns, often using wildcards, concatenations, and repetitions to describe flexible structures. For instance, a pattern like "a*b" matches one or more 'a' characters followed by a 'b', allowing for linear scanning of strings to locate such sequences efficiently. This approach extends basic literal matching by incorporating operators that handle variability, such as Kleene stars for repetition or unions for alternatives, forming the foundation for more complex text processing tasks.
Regular expressions (regex) represent a specialized form of string pattern matching, where patterns are defined using a formal grammar of primitives like character classes, quantifiers, and anchors to describe and match textual patterns precisely. Pattern matching in general serves as a broader framework, with regex acting as string-specific implementations that leverage these primitives for tasks like validation or extraction; for example, the regex \d{3}-\d{2}-\d{4} matches U.S. Social Security numbers in a string. Seminal work by Ken Thompson formalized regex in the context of text editors, introducing nondeterministic finite automata (NFA) to compile patterns for matching.
Beyond linear matching, tree patterns apply to strings by treating them as hierarchical structures, such as parsing XML documents or validating balanced parentheses, where the pattern defines a tree-like grammar to ensure nested correctness. In XML parsing, a tree pattern might specify elements like <tag attr="value">content</tag>, recursively matching substructures within the string representation. This hierarchical approach contrasts with flat linear matching by enabling context-free grammars for more expressive string validation.
Practical examples include validating email formats with patterns like +@+\.{2,}, which uses concatenations and repetitions to check domain and local parts, or scanning log entries for error codes via wildcard-based filters. The SNOBOL language pioneered pattern-directed string processing, where patterns are first-class objects that can be composed and applied dynamically to strings for tasks like text transformation.
Efficiency in string pattern matching often pits backtracking algorithms, which trial-and-error match patterns by recursively exploring possibilities, against deterministic finite automata (DFA), which precompile patterns into state machines for linear-time scanning. Backtracking is intuitive for complex regex but can suffer from catastrophic slowdowns on ambiguous patterns, whereas DFA construction, as in the GNU regex library, ensures O(n) time per match at the cost of higher preprocessing.

Historical Development

Early Origins

The concept of pattern matching traces its pre-computing origins to mathematical practices in algebra, where systematic replacement of symbolic termsakin to rewriting rulesemerged as a method for solving equations and manipulating expressions. This approach dates back to ancient algebra but gained sophistication in the 19th century through developments in symbolic logic and abstract algebra. Mathematicians like George Boole, in his 1847 work The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, employed pattern-based substitutions to formalize logical inferences and equation solving.
In linguistics during the 1950s, Noam Chomsky formalized pattern recognition through his hierarchy of formal grammars, classifying languages by their ability to generate and recognize structured patterns in strings. Chomsky's 1956 paper "Three Models for the Description of Language" introduced models ranging from regular to recursively enumerable languages, establishing foundational concepts for syntactic pattern matching in computational linguistics.
With the emergence of electronic computers, these ideas transitioned into programmable constructs. In 1958, John McCarthy's Lisp design featured the 'cond' form, a conditional expression that evaluated predicates in sequence and selected the first matching branch, serving as an early precursor to structured pattern-based dispatching in programming.
In 1962, the SNOBOL language, developed at Bell Labs by David J. Farber, Ralph E. Griswold, and Ivan P. Polonsky, pioneered advanced string pattern matching with a declarative syntax for defining complex patterns and applying them to text processing tasks, marking a significant step in computational pattern application.
Influences from formal logic further shaped pattern matching in the 1960s, particularly through unification, a mechanism for matching and substituting variables to equate expressions. J. A. Robinson introduced unification in his 1965 resolution principle for automated theorem proving, enabling efficient pattern generalization in logical inference systems.
Key figures like Grace Hopper contributed foundational ideas through her early compiler work; her 1952 A-0 system and subsequent FLOW-MATIC compiler (19551959) used pattern-based lexical analysis to translate English-like instructions into machine code, introducing syntactic matching concepts to high-level programming.
Early AI planning systems in the 1960s incorporated pattern matching for goal recognition and response generation; for instance, Joseph Weizenbaum's ELIZA program (1966) employed keyword and phrase patterns to simulate psychotherapeutic dialogue, demonstrating pattern-driven automation in interactive systems.
Non-Western influences, though less documented in Western literature, included early Japanese research on pattern concepts; in the 1960s, NHK's computational studies on visual pattern recognition for television signal processing explored algorithmic matching techniques that paralleled emerging programming paradigms.

Modern Evolution

In the 1980s and 1990s, pattern matching saw significant refinement within functional programming languages, building on earlier foundations in the ML family. Standard ML, formalized starting in 1983, integrated pattern matching as a core mechanism for case analysis on datatypes, enhancing expressiveness in type-safe programming. Haskell, released in 1990, further advanced this by incorporating pattern matching into its lazy evaluation model, enabling concise handling of algebraic data types in pure functional contexts. Concurrently, theoretical advancements addressed the computational complexity of pattern matching, with works like Randal Bryant's 1992 introduction of Ordered Binary Decision Diagrams (OBDDs) providing efficient representations for Boolean functions and pattern evaluation, reducing exponential complexity in verification tasks.
From the 2000s onward, pattern matching proliferated beyond niche functional languages into mainstream ones, broadening its applicability. Rust, stable since version 1.0 in 2015, adopted comprehensive pattern matching for safe resource management and control flow, including destructuring and guards for enums and structs. Python introduced structural pattern matching in version 3.10 (released in 2021), allowing match statements to handle complex data shapes like lists, dictionaries, and classes, which streamlined code for data processing tasks. Enhancements such as irrefutable patternsthose guaranteed to match without runtime checksemerged in these languages to optimize binding in let expressions and function parameters, minimizing overhead in performance-critical code.
Recent developments in the 2020s have extended pattern matching to emerging paradigms, addressing gaps in traditional implementations. In WebAssembly, proposals like WASI pattern matching support efficient scanning and matching for data processing across language boundaries. Quantum-inspired approaches have introduced novel algorithms, such as those using density matrices for metaphor detection in natural language processing, offering potential speedups over classical methods in certain tasks. In machine learning frameworks like TensorFlow, pattern-based static analysis of tensor shapes has become crucial for verifying operations and detecting mismatches, as detailed in tools that model library semantics to prevent runtime errors in neural network pipelines.
Standardization efforts continue to drive adoption, with the ECMAScript proposal for pattern matching remaining at Stage 1 as of 2025, introducing matcher patterns akin to destructuring for JavaScript's dynamic typing and under consideration for future editions. Looking ahead, trends point toward extensions for parallel and distributed systems in cloud computing, where algorithms for graph pattern matching on big datasuch as those using subgraph isomorphism in distributed environmentsenable scalable processing for network security and large-scale analytics.

References

 Pattern Matching

 Pattern Matching Algorithms: An Overview - CUNY

 Pattern Matching Techniques and Their Applications to ...

PEP 634 Structural Pattern Matching: Specification | peps.python.org

 Reconciling Exhaustive Pattern Matching with Objects

 FAST PATTERN MATCHING IN STRINGS*

 Pattern Matching - cs.Princeton

 Pattern Matching Chapter 16 - Plantation Productions

 5PM: Secure Pattern Matching? - UCLA Computer Science

 Generalized Pattern Matching Micro-Engine - Full-Time Faculty

Patterns and pattern matching

Pattern Matching - F# | Microsoft Learn

 The Pattern Languages - Higher Education | Pearson

 Toward a more expressive pattern matching in Haskell - POLITesi

 Open Pattern Matching for C++ - Bjarne Stroustrup's Homepage

 How to compile pattern matching - Jules Jacobs

Term Rewriting and All That

Algebraic Data Types - CIS UPenn

 Focusing on Pattern Matching

https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch3.html#x10-490003.17

https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch3.html#x10-480003.15

4 Case Expressions and Pattern Matching - Haskell.org

https://ocaml.org/manual/expr.html#sss:match

(7) Expressions - OCaml

Extractor Objects | Tour of Scala

For Comprehensions | Tour of Scala

https://www.erlang.org/doc/system/expressions.html#receive

OCaml For the Masses - Communications of the ACM

Compiling pattern matching to good decision trees

 Pattern Matching - Open Standards

PEP 636 Structural Pattern Matching: Tutorial | peps.python.org

JEP 441: Pattern Matching for switch - OpenJDK

10- Unification - Amzi! inc. Adventure in Prolog tutorial

The match Control Flow Construct - The Rust Programming Language

Mixing matching, mutation, and moves in Rust | Rust Blog

PEP 635 Structural Pattern Matching: Motivation and Rationale

https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch3.html#x8-460003.13

https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch3.html#x8-580003.17

Pattern Matching | Tour of Scala - Scala Documentation

https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch20.html#x28-22800020

 The Implementation of Functional Programming Languages - Microsoft

 Structural and semantic pattern matching analysis in Haskell - arXiv

 Open. Closed. Open. - SciSpace

Mathematics - 19th Century, Algebra, Calculus | Britannica

A history of the SNOBOL programming languages

 A Maehine-Orlented Logic Based on the Resolution Principle

About Grace Hopper - IEEE Spectrum

https://brill.com/view/journals/dias/11/1-2/article-p3_2.xml

 The History of Standard ML

 A History of Haskell: Being Lazy With Class - Microsoft

What's New In Python 3.10 Python 3.14.0 documentation

 Quantum Pattern Matching - arXiv

 Static Analysis of Shape in TensorFlow Programs

tc39/proposal-pattern-matching - GitHub

 Parallel and distributed algorithms for pattern matching in big graphs

JEP 443: Unnamed Patterns and Variables (Preview)
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion