Physical schema Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Physical schema
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 In database management systems (DBMS), the physical schema, also known as the internal schema, defines the lowest level of data abstraction and specifies how data is actually stored on physical storage devices, including details such as file organizations, record layouts, indices (e.g., hash or B-tree structures), and access paths like tracks and cylinders. This schema focuses on optimizing storage efficiency and retrieval performance by minimizing physical distances between related data blocks, often incorporating techniques like blocked records and linked lists for block management. Unlike higher-level schemas, the physical schema is typically hidden from users and applications, with the DBMS handling all mappings to ensure seamless data access.
The physical schema is a core component of the ANSI/SPARC three-schema architecture, which separates database design into internal (physical), conceptual (logical), and external (view) levels to promote data independence and modularity. At this internal level, storage decisionssuch as data compression, partitioning, and hardware-specific allocationsare implemented to support the conceptual schema's relational structures without altering application code, a principle known as physical data independence. For instance, changes to indexing strategies or migration to new storage media can occur transparently, as the DBMS automatically adjusts the mapping between the conceptual and physical layers.
Key aspects of the physical schema include its role in performance tuning, where elements like storage allocation strategies and data statistics directly influence query execution times and resource utilization in large-scale databases. Historically, early database applications in the 1960s directly interacted with this level for all operations, but modern DBMS abstract it away to allow developers to focus on logical data models. While the physical schema is DBMS-specific and may vary across systems (e.g., Oracle's tablespaces versus SQL Server's filegroups), its design remains essential for scalability in relational, NoSQL, and distributed environments.

Fundamentals

Definition and Purpose

The physical schema, also referred to as the internal schema, constitutes the lowest level within the three-schema architecture of database management systems, defining how data is physically stored, accessed, and managed on hardware storage devices such as disks. This level specifies the actual representation of data in secondary storage, including the organization of files and the mechanisms for data retrieval. Originating from the ANSI/X3/SPARC Study Group's framework proposed in 1975, the physical schema emphasizes implementation independence, allowing database designers to focus on storage details without impacting higher abstraction levels.
The primary purpose of the physical schema is to enhance storage efficiency, improve query performance, and maximize hardware utilization, all while preserving the integrity of the logical data model above it. By encapsulating hardware-specific decisions, it enables the database management system to handle low-level operations transparently, ensuring that modifications to storage structures do not necessitate changes to application logic or user views. This separation supports physical data independence, a core principle that allows system administrators to tune performance based on evolving hardware without disrupting the overall database structure.
Key characteristics of the physical schema include its platform-specific nature, incorporating details such as file organizations for data layout, block sizes for efficient I/O operations, and data compression methods to reduce storage footprint. These elements are customized to the capabilities of the underlying storage technology, ensuring optimal alignment between data placement and hardware constraints. The three-schema architecture provides a foundational framework for achieving this abstraction, insulating conceptual and external schemas from physical implementation variations.

Role in the Three-Schema Architecture

The three-schema architecture, as defined by the ANSI/SPARC framework, structures database management systems into three abstraction levels to separate user applications from physical storage details: the external level, which provides customized user views of the data; the conceptual level, which describes the overall logical model of the database including entities, relationships, and constraints; and the internal level, which specifies the physical implementation of data storage and access.
Within this architecture, the physical schema operates at the internal level, serving as the lowest tier that translates the platform-independent conceptual schema into hardware-specific representations, such as storage structures and access methods, to ensure efficient data management on physical devices. This translation occurs through a conceptual-to-internal mapping, which defines how logical elements like relations and attributes are realized in physical terms, while insulating higher levels from implementation specifics.
The separation afforded by the three-schema architecture promotes data independence, particularly physical data independence, enabling changes to the physical schemasuch as reorganizing storage for better performancewithout necessitating modifications to the conceptual schema or external user views. Complementing this, an external-to-conceptual mapping allows multiple user-specific views to be derived from the unified logical model, further enhancing flexibility and abstraction across the system.

Comparison to Other Schemas

Differences from Logical Schema

The logical schema serves as the middle layer in database design, defining entities, relationships, and constraints in a manner independent of the specific database management system (DBMS), such as specifying tables, primary keys, and foreign keys in the relational model. This declarative approach focuses on the semantics of the data, providing a high-level view that abstracts away implementation details to ensure logical data independence for applications and users.
In contrast, the physical schema addresses the implementation details of how logical elements are stored and accessed on hardware, including choices like row-oriented versus column-oriented storage formats and access methods such as B-trees or hash tables. This imperative layer optimizes for efficiency, tailoring data organization to the underlying storage systems like disks or memory to minimize access times and resource usage.
Key differences between the two include their levels of abstraction, primary concerns, and degree of volatility. The logical schema operates at a declarative abstraction, emphasizing data meaning and relationships without regard to storage mechanics, while the physical schema is imperative, specifying exact storage structures and access paths. Regarding concerns, the logical schema prioritizes data semantics and integrity constraints, whereas the physical schema targets performance, hardware compatibility, and optimization for query execution. Additionally, the physical schema exhibits greater volatility, as it is frequently adjusted to incorporate new hardware advancements or performance tuning without altering the logical schema, thanks to physical data independence.
For instance, a logical schema might define a table Employees with attributes ID (primary key), Name, and Department, capturing the relational structure without storage specifics. Its physical counterpart, however, could implement this as row-stored files on disk with a B-tree index on ID for efficient lookups, a configuration that can evolve independently as storage technology changes.

Differences from Conceptual Schema

In the ANSI/SPARC three-schema architecture, the conceptual schemaoften synonymous with the logical schemarepresents the middle layer, providing a global, abstract view of the entire database that encompasses entities, relationships, constraints, and business rules independent of any physical storage considerations. This layer is typically visualized through entity-relationship (ER) diagrams, which capture the enterprise-wide data structure and semantics for the database community as a whole. By focusing on logical organization, it ensures that the database design aligns with organizational needs without delving into implementation specifics.
In contrast, the physical schema addresses low-level, system-specific details concerned with the actual storage and retrieval of data, such as file organization, data compression, and access paths, which are entirely absent from the conceptual layer. It translates the abstract conceptual model into a concrete form optimized for the underlying hardware and operating system, prioritizing efficiency in data access and space utilization. This specificity allows the physical schema to evolve with technological advancements, such as changes in storage devices, without altering the higher-level abstractions.
The primary differences between the conceptual and physical schemas lie in their scope, focus, and independence. The conceptual schema maintains a broad, static scope across the enterprise, emphasizing unchanging business logic and data integrity, while the physical schema has a narrow, dynamic scope tied to a particular DBMS environment, allowing adjustments for performance tuning. In terms of focus, the conceptual schema centers on semantic meaning and user-oriented rules, whereas the physical schema concentrates on technical execution to support efficient operations. Regarding independence, the conceptual schema serves as the driving force for database design, enabling physical modificationssuch as storage reorganizationwithout impacting the abstract view, thus promoting data independence as outlined in the ANSI/SPARC framework.
A representative example illustrates these distinctions: at the conceptual level, the "Customer" entity is defined abstractly with attributes like ID, name, and address, along with relationships to entities such as "Orders," focusing solely on business semantics. At the physical level, this entity is realized through specific storage mechanisms, such as a table clustered on the customer ID to enable rapid lookups based on that key. This separation ensures that business users interact with the conceptual model while system administrators handle physical optimizations.

Key Components

Storage Structures

In database management systems, storage structures organize data at the physical level to facilitate efficient storage and retrieval, implementing logical tables through underlying file formats.
Heap files store records in an unordered manner, appending new entries to the end of the file without regard to any specific key order, which optimizes insert operations but requires full scans for searches. Sequential files, in contrast, maintain records sorted by a primary key, enabling efficient range queries and sequential access but incurring costs for insertions that disrupt the order. Hashed files employ a hash function to map keys to specific storage locations, supporting direct access for equality-based lookups with average O(1) time complexity, though they perform poorly for range queries.
File organization methods determine how these structures allocate space on disk. Contiguous allocation places records in consecutive blocks for rapid sequential reads, minimizing seek times but risking fragmentation during expansions. Linked allocation connects records via pointers, allowing non-contiguous placement to reduce external fragmentation, yet it slows down access due to pointer traversals. The Indexed Sequential Access Method (ISAM) combines sequential ordering with an index for direct access, organizing data in blocks while using a tree-like index to locate records quickly, though it can suffer from overflow issues in static structures.
Data page and block management handles the granular storage of records within fixed-size units transferred between disk and memory. Fixed-length records simplify packing into pages by ensuring uniform slot sizes, promoting efficient space utilization and parallel access, whereas variable-length records accommodate diverse data types but require slotted pages with headers to track offsets and prevent overflows. Buffering maintains copies of pages in main memory to reduce disk I/O, using algorithms like least recently used (LRU) to manage the buffer pool. Overflow handling addresses insertions that exceed page capacity, often by chaining overflow pages or reorganizing data to maintain performance.
Compression techniques at the physical storage level reduce disk space and I/O without altering the logical schema. Run-length encoding (RLE) exploits consecutive identical values by storing a count-value pair, achieving high ratios for sorted or repetitive data like timestamps. Dictionary-based methods map repeated values to unique codes stored in a separate dictionary, enabling compact representation for low-cardinality attributes such as categorical fields, with decoding overhead balanced by reduced storage.

Indexing and Access Methods

In physical schemas, indexing structures are auxiliary data organizations designed to accelerate query processing by providing efficient pathways to locate and retrieve data rows without scanning the entire storage. These indexes are typically built atop core storage structures such as heaps or sorted files, enabling the database management system (DBMS) to optimize access based on query predicates. Common index types include B-trees, bitmaps, and hash indexes, each suited to specific query patterns and data characteristics.
B-trees, introduced as a balanced tree structure for maintaining large ordered indexes, support efficient range queries, equality searches, and sequential access with logarithmic time complexity for insertions, deletions, and lookups. Each node in a B-tree holds multiple keys and pointers, ensuring the tree remains balanced to minimize disk I/O during traversals, which is critical for disk-based physical storage. Bitmap indexes, particularly effective for attributes with low cardinality, represent each distinct value as a bitmap where bits indicate the presence of rows matching that value, allowing compact storage and rapid bitwise operations for conjunctions and disjunctions in multi-attribute queries. This design excels in analytical workloads, such as those in data warehouses, where multiple filters are common, though it incurs higher update costs due to bitmap modifications. Hash indexes, optimized for exact equality searches, employ a hash function to map keys directly to storage locations, achieving constant-time average-case access without supporting range queries or ordering.
Access methods leverage these indexes to retrieve data, with costs influenced by factors like page fetches, CPU operations, and selectivity. A sequential scan reads the entire table in physical storage order, incurring costs proportional to the table size (e.g., number of pages multiplied by sequential page read cost, typically 1.0 unit per page in query planners), making it preferable for high-selectivity queries or small tables where index overhead exceeds benefits. An index scan traverses the index structure to identify matching keys, then fetches corresponding data pages from the heap, with total cost comprising index traversal (e.g., logarithmic for B-trees) plus random I/O for scattered heap accesses, often higher than sequential scans for large result sets due to non-localized reads. Bitmap index scans construct a bitmap from one or more indexes to mark qualifying rows, followed by a heap scan on the bitmap's positions; this method reduces I/O by clustering scattered accesses into sequential bursts, with startup costs for bitmap building but lower overall execution costs for moderate-selectivity multi-condition queries compared to individual index scans.
Indexes can be clustered or non-clustered, affecting how data rows are physically organized relative to the index. In a clustered index, the table's data rows are physically sorted and stored in the order of the index key, allowing direct sequential access to ranges without additional lookups, though only one such index per table is possible as it defines the primary data ordering. Non-clustered indexes maintain a separate structure with key values and pointers (e.g., row IDs) to the data rows, which remain in their original heap order, enabling multiple indexes per table but requiring extra I/O to fetch rows via pointers, which can lead to higher costs for large result sets.
Maintenance operations ensure index integrity and performance amid data modifications. Index creation involves scanning the table to build the structure, sorting keys for B-trees or computing bitmaps/hashes, with time complexity often O(n log n) for n rows in balanced trees. Updates during insertions, deletions, or modifications require propagating changes through the indexe.g., leaf node splits in B-trees or bitmap bit flipspotentially incurring logarithmic costs per operation. Fragmentation arises from page splits and deletions, leading to logical gaps or out-of-order extents that increase I/O; handling involves reorganization (compacting pages without full rebuild, suitable for 5-30% fragmentation) or rebuild (full recreation, ideal for >30% fragmentation) to restore density and contiguity.

Partitioning and Distribution

Partitioning in the physical schema involves dividing a database table or dataset into smaller, logical subsets to optimize storage, query performance, and manageability on underlying hardware. This technique allows the database management system (DBMS) to handle large volumes of data more efficiently by aligning physical storage with access requirements. Horizontal partitioning splits rows based on key values, vertical partitioning separates columns, and hybrid approaches combine both for complex scenarios.
Horizontal partitioning, also known as sharding in distributed contexts, divides data rows across multiple partitions using criteria such as range, list, or hash functions. In range partitioning, rows are grouped by value ranges of a partition key, such as dates in a time-series table, enabling efficient pruning of irrelevant partitions during queries. List partitioning assigns rows to partitions based on discrete values in the key, useful for categorical data like geographic regions. Hash partitioning applies a hash function to the key for even distribution, reducing hotspots and supporting load balancing in high-throughput environments. Vertical partitioning, by contrast, splits tables into subsets of columns, storing frequently accessed columns together to minimize I/O operations, while less critical columns reside separately. Hybrid partitioning integrates these methods, such as combining range-based horizontal splits with vertical column separation, to address multifaceted workloads.
Distribution strategies in the physical schema determine how partitioned data is placed across storage resources, ranging from centralized to fully distributed architectures. Centralized distribution keeps all partitions on a single node or disk array, simplifying management but limiting scalability for massive datasets. Distributed storage, prevalent in multi-node clusters, spreads partitions across multiple servers or cloud instances, with sharding extending this by assigning shards to independent database instances for horizontal scaling. In cloud environments, sharding facilitates elastic resource allocation, where data is dynamically reassigned based on demand. Physical implications include strategic data placement to minimize latency, such as colocating related partitions on the same disk or node to reduce network overhead. Replication duplicates partitions across nodes for fault tolerance, ensuring data availability during failures, while load balancing distributes query traffic evenly to prevent bottlenecks.
Criteria for implementing partitioning and distribution emphasize alignment with workload characteristics and infrastructure limits. Access patterns guide decisions, such as range partitioning for time-based queries to enable fast scans of recent data. Data volume influences partition granularity; large tables exceeding hardware capacities, like terabyte-scale datasets, necessitate finer divisions to avoid single-point overloads. Hardware constraints, including disk I/O throughput and node memory, dictate feasible strategies for instance, vertical partitioning suits systems with slow storage by isolating hot columns. These factors ensure that physical design enhances parallelism without introducing undue complexity in maintenance or query routing.

Design and Implementation

Performance Optimization Techniques

Performance optimization in physical schema design focuses on tuning storage structures, access methods, and resource allocation to enhance database efficiency, particularly by minimizing disk I/O and computational overhead. One key technique is physical-level denormalization, which involves restructuring data storage to reduce join operations during query execution, thereby improving read performance in relational database management systems (RDBMS). For instance, clustering related data on the same physical pages or using vertical partitioning can eliminate the need for costly cross-table accesses, leading to faster query responses in transaction-heavy workloads.
Materialized views serve as another critical optimization by precomputing and storing query results directly in physical storage, avoiding repeated computations for complex aggregations or joins. These views are refreshed periodically or incrementally, balancing freshness with performance gains, and are particularly effective in data warehousing environments where analytical queries dominate. Caching mechanisms, such as buffer pools, further bolster efficiency by retaining frequently accessed data pages in memory, reducing physical disk reads and enabling sub-millisecond access times for hot data sets. Buffer pools allocate dedicated memory regions to hold database pages, with algorithms like least recently used (LRU) eviction ensuring optimal hit ratios above 90% in tuned systems. Systems like SQL Server allow configuration of the buffer pool to utilize a large portion of available RAM, such as leaving 10-20% for the operating system, to minimize paging and support high query rates.
Hardware choices significantly influence physical schema performance, starting with storage devices where solid-state drives (SSDs) outperform hard disk drives (HDDs) in random read/write operations critical for databases. SSDs achieve latencies under 100 microseconds for I/O-bound queries, compared to 5-10 milliseconds on HDDs, resulting in up to 22-fold throughput improvements in transaction processing benchmarks like TPC-C. RAID configurations enhance reliability and speed; for example, RAID 10 combines mirroring and striping to deliver high I/O throughput while tolerating failures, ideal for database logs and active data files.
Query-specific optimizations involve tailoring physical designs to anticipated join orders and aggregations through cost-based analysis, where the optimizer estimates execution costs using statistics on table sizes, cardinalities, and selectivity. This approach selects efficient access paths, such as hash joins for large datasets or nested-loop joins for indexed small relations, potentially reducing overall query costs significantly in complex workloads. Techniques like indexing and partitioning can be leveraged as enablers, directing the physical layout to favor low-cost scan orders.
Key performance metrics include throughput (transactions per second), latency (query response time), and I/O reduction (physical reads avoided), which collectively gauge schema efficiency. For example, optimized schemas can achieve high throughputs with low latencies in in-memory configurations, while cutting I/O substantially via caching and precomputation. Monitoring tools like EXPLAIN plans provide visibility into these metrics by outlining execution steps, costs, and resource usage, allowing administrators to identify bottlenecks such as full table scans and refine physical designs iteratively.

Security and Integrity Considerations

Physical schema design plays a critical role in safeguarding data at the storage layer, where physical security measures protect against unauthorized access to hardware and files. Encryption at rest is implemented at the file level using standards like AES to ensure that data stored on disk remains unreadable even if physical media is stolen or accessed illicitly. This approach, often referred to as Transparent Data Encryption (TDE) in database systems, applies to the physical files comprising the schema without requiring application-level changes. Access controls on storage devices further enhance security by enforcing operating system-level permissions and role-based restrictions on who can read or modify database files, preventing insider threats or external breaches at the hardware level. Auditing of physical I/O operations involves logging all disk read and write activities to detect and investigate potential tampering or unauthorized manipulations, providing a forensic trail for security incidents.
To maintain data integrity, physical schema incorporates enforcement mechanisms that operate at the storage and recovery levels. Check constraints are enforced by the DBMS during data modification operations, validating values against predefined rules at the storage level to ensure consistency without relying solely on higher-level abstractions. Recovery structures such as transaction logs record all changes to physical pages, while checkpoints periodically flush these logs to stable storage, enabling the database to reconstruct a consistent state after crashes or failures. These elements collectively prevent data corruption by allowing rollback to the last valid checkpoint and replaying logged operations in sequence.
Backup and recovery strategies in physical schema focus on durable copies of storage structures to mitigate loss. Physical dump strategies involve creating exact replicas of database files and volumes, which can be restored directly to recover the entire schema without logical reconstruction. Point-in-time recovery leverages archived logs to roll forward from a full physical backup to any specific moment, minimizing data loss in the event of corruption or deletion. Redundancy through mirroring duplicates physical data across multiple storage devices or nodes in real-time, providing immediate failover and protection against hardware failures.
Compliance with regulations like GDPR requires physical schema to incorporate secure handling practices for personal data, including mandatory encryption at rest and audited access to storage to prevent breaches that could expose identifiable information. Partitioning techniques can support secure data isolation by distributing sensitive partitions across isolated physical storage units, enhancing compliance through physical separation.

Examples and Applications

Physical Schema in Relational DBMS

In relational database management systems (RDBMS), the physical schema defines how data is stored on disk or in memory, optimizing for performance, storage efficiency, and access patterns in structured, ACID-compliant environments. Traditional RDBMS like Oracle and SQL Server implement physical storage through hierarchical structures that map logical elements such as tables and indexes to physical files, enabling fine-grained control over data placement and retrieval. This approach ensures data integrity while supporting high-throughput operations typical in enterprise applications.
Oracle Database employs tablespaces as the primary logical storage units, which consist of one or more data files containing segments, extents, and blocks. A segment represents a database object like a table or index, composed of contiguous extentseach an allocation of one or more data blocks of fixed sizeand stored entirely within a single tablespace. SQL Server, in contrast, uses filegroups to group one or more physical files into logical units, allowing administrators to place objects on specific storage devices for balanced I/O and easier management; every database has a primary filegroup by default, with secondary ones for partitioning large objects. These features facilitate physical allocation tailored to workload demands, such as placing indexes on faster storage.
Implementation of physical schema in these systems involves specifying storage parameters during object creation or alteration. In Oracle, the CREATE TABLE or ALTER TABLE statements include a STORAGE clause to define initial extents, next extent sizes, and other parameters; for example:
CREATE TABLE employees (
 emp_id NUMBER PRIMARY KEY,
 name VARCHAR2(100)
) STORAGE (
 INITIAL 64K,
 NEXT 64K,
 PCTINCREASE 0
);
This allocates space efficiently for the table segment. For indexes, Oracle allows similar clauses to control physical properties like storage in specific tablespaces. In SQL Server, physical properties for indexes are set via CREATE INDEX with options like FILLFACTOR to manage page fullness and reduce fragmentation, or placement on a filegroup; for instance, CREATE CLUSTERED INDEX IX_Employees_EmpID ON Employees(EmpID) ON FG_Secondary; directs the index to a secondary filegroup, influencing physical data ordering and storage.
A representative case study in optimizing a relational schema for high-volume transactions involves a financial services firm using SQL Server to handle millions of daily trade records, where physical clustering via clustered indexes physically sorts data rows by the primary key to minimize I/O for range queries. By implementing filegroups across SSDs for hot data and HDDs for archives, combined with regular index maintenance using sys.dm_db_index_physical_stats to monitor fragmentation, the system significantly reduced query latency during peak loads. In Oracle, similar optimization for transactional workloads uses attribute clustering on tables to group related data physically based on column values, as in CREATE TABLE trades (...) CLUSTERING BY (trade_date, account_id);, which enhances scan efficiency for time-series data in high-throughput OLTP scenarios.
The evolution of physical schema in RDBMS traces back to IBM's System R project in the 1970s, which pioneered relational storage with basic file-based structures and influenced modern SQL implementations by demonstrating the feasibility of declarative query languages over physical data organization. From these early prototypes, systems advanced to incorporate advanced features like in-memory OLTP in SQL Server, where memory-optimized tables store data in durable hash or range indexes entirely in RAM for lock-free concurrency, achieving up to 30x faster transaction processing compared to disk-based tables. Oracle's Database In-Memory extends this by adding a columnar in-memory store alongside row-based disk structures, enabling hybrid OLTP/OLAP workloads with automatic population and SIMD vector processing for accelerated analytics on transactional data. In relational contexts, B-tree indexing remains a core access method for efficient key-based lookups across these evolutions.

Physical Schema in NoSQL Systems

In NoSQL databases, physical schema designs adapt to handle unstructured or semi-structured data at scale, diverging from rigid relational structures. Document stores, such as MongoDB, employ BSON (Binary JSON) as the primary storage format, which serializes documents into a binary representation for efficient disk and network transmission, allowing flexible nesting of fields without predefined schemas. Key-value stores, like those in Amazon DynamoDB, utilize consistent hashing to map keys to physical nodes in a distributed hash table, minimizing data movement during node additions or failures by assigning keys to points on a hash ring. Column-family stores, exemplified by Apache Cassandra, organize data into SSTables (Sorted String Tables), which are immutable, sorted files on disk that append writes sequentially to optimize read performance through log-structured merge-trees.
Distribution is a core emphasis in NoSQL physical schemas to enable horizontal scaling. Automatic sharding partitions data across nodes using hash-based or range-based strategies, with systems like Cassandra employing virtual nodes for balanced load distribution. Replication factors, typically set to three for fault tolerance, duplicate data across multiple nodes, ensuring availability even if some replicas fail, while node-level storage handles local persistence on commodity hardware like SSDs.
In MongoDB, physical layouts for collections can include capped collections, which function as fixed-size circular buffers to store documents in insertion order, ideal for high-throughput logging or time-series data where old entries are automatically overwritten. Eventual consistency in NoSQL systems, such as Cassandra's tunable consistency levels, impacts physical logs by allowing asynchronous replication, which reduces write latency but may require compaction processes in SSTables to resolve conflicts from concurrent updates.
Post-2010, modern trends have introduced hybrid physical schemas in NewSQL systems, which blend NoSQL's distributed partitioning and replication with relational ACID guarantees, as seen in databases like CockroachDB that use range-based sharding on a key-value foundation for scalable OLTP workloads.

References

Three Level Database Architecture

 The Relational Data Model Data and Its Structure Physical Data ...

 Database System Concepts and Architecture

 Database Management Systems

Modeling the real world --- The 3-Schemas Architecture - Emory CS

None

 Database System Concepts and Architecture

 An Introduction to Database Systems - Computer Science

 CS 44800: Introduction To Relational Database Systems

 Database System Concepts and Architecture define: data model

https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/the-three-level-ansi-sparc-architecture/

 Database Storage Part 1 - CMU 15-445/645

 Chapter 10: Storage and File Structure

 Chapter 10: Storage and File Structure

 Chapter 13: Data Storage Structures - Database System Concepts

 Storage and File Structure

T. Andrew Yang: CSCI5333 - Class Notes

ISAM and B-trees

 CMU SCS 15-721 (Spring 2023) :: Database Compression

 Integrating Compression and Execution in Column-Oriented ...

MySQL 8.4 Reference Manual :: 26.1 Overview of Partitioning in ...

 Integrating Vertical and Horizontal Partitioning into Automated ...

Understanding Data Partitioning: Strategies and Benefits | EDB

What is Database Sharding? - Shard DB Explained - Amazon AWS

What Is a Distributed Database? - Oracle

Sharding pattern - Azure Architecture Center | Microsoft Learn

Data partitioning guidance - Azure Architecture Center

What is data partitioning, and how to do it right - CockroachDB

Access path selection in a relational database management system

Denormalization guidelines for base and transaction tables

 Materialized Views in Oracle - VLDB Endowment

13 Tuning the Database Buffer Cache - Oracle Help Center

Database processing performance and energy efficiency evaluation ...

RAID: high-performance, reliable secondary storage

Memory Management Architecture Guide - SQL Server

EXPLAIN PLAN - Oracle Help Center

Azure Data Encryption-at-Rest - Azure Security | Microsoft Learn

Encryption at Rest - TiDB Docs

Database Design for Security: Best Practices to Keep Sensitive ...

SQL Server transaction log architecture - Simple Talk

Integrity Constraints in SQL: A Guide With Examples - DataCamp

 15-445/645 Database Systems (Fall 2019) - 20 Logging Schemes

 Backup and Recovery User's Guide - Oracle Help Center

Backup and Recovery for Databases: What You Should Know

Can Mirroring Replace Backups In Your Disaster Recovery Strategy?

Database Compliance for GDPR: Implications and Best Practices

Physical Schema of MongoDB (BSON) - ResearchGate

What Is a NoSQL Database? | IBM

Distributed Algorithms in NoSQL Databases - Highly Scalable Blog

Cassandra vs MongoDB - Difference Between NoSQL Databases

Dynamo | Apache Cassandra Documentation

A Comprehensive Guide to Apache Cassandra Architecture

What is Apache Cassandra? - ScyllaDB

Capped Collections - Database Manual - MongoDB Docs

Cutting Edge - Documents, Databases and Eventual Consistency

 Utilizing a NoSQL Data Store for Scalable Log Analysis

 What's Really New with NewSQL? - CMU School of Computer Science
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion