PostScript Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
PostScript
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 PostScript is a device-independent page description language (PDL) and Turing-complete programming language developed by Adobe Systems in 1984 for describing the appearance of text, graphics, and images on printed pages or display screens. It allows for precise, scalable rendering of vector graphics, raster images, fonts, and colors, enabling high-fidelity output across various devices without regard to specific hardware resolutions.
Developed by Adobe cofounders John Warnock and Charles "Chuck" Geschke, along with engineers Doug Brotz, Bill Paxton, and Ed Taft, PostScript emerged from earlier work on Xerox's Interpress system and took approximately 20 person-years to complete. Adobe, founded in December 1982, released PostScript Level 1 in 1984 as its flagship product, quickly establishing it as a standard for laser printers and typesetters. Key milestones include the 1991 introduction of Level 2, which added features like in-RIP color separations and data compression for faster processing, and the 1998 release of PostScript 3, supporting over 256 levels of gray, PDF integration, and enhanced multimedia capabilities.
PostScript's stack-based programming model, inspired by Forth, uses a concise syntax to define paths, fill patterns, and transformations, making it editable as plain ASCII text and interpretable by raster image processors (RIPs) in printers. Its device independence revolutionized desktop publishing by allowing applications like Adobe PageMaker to produce professional-quality output, bypassing traditional typesetting. In the 1980s, partnerships such as Apples $2.5 million investment in 1985 led to the LaserWriter printer, fueling the desktop publishing boom and standardizing digital workflows in offices and commercial printing.
Today, while largely succeeded by PDF for document exchangeitself built on PostScript foundationsPostScript has been integrated into more than 20 million devices since its launch through licensed implementations, and the Adobe PDF Print Engine powers over 200,000 printing presses and proofers worldwide. It remains essential for high-end printing presses, proofers, and legacy systems, ensuring consistent quality in graphic arts and publishing.

History

Origins and Development

PostScript originated from the innovative work conducted at Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) in the late 1970s, where John Warnock developed the Interpress page description language to control laser printers and enable high-quality output. Interpress aimed to provide a more flexible alternative to the rigid printer protocols of the era, but Xerox declined to commercialize it, prompting Warnock and his colleague Charles "Chuck" Geschke to leave PARC. In December 1982, Warnock and Geschke founded Adobe Systems Incorporated in Mountain View, California, with a small team of former PARC engineers, including Douglas Brotz and others, to pursue the commercialization of a similar technology. This new venture focused on creating an open, licensable printing solution rather than proprietary hardware.
The primary motivation behind PostScript was to develop a device-independent programming language that could describe pages with precision across diverse printers and output devices, overcoming the limitations of raster-based systems, which produced pixelated graphics unsuitable for professional publishing, and early vector approaches, which lacked comprehensive support for complex layouts and fonts. Warnock envisioned a "Print Anything" architecture that would allow scalable, high-fidelity rendering of text and graphics, making professional-quality printing accessible beyond specialized typesetting equipment. This goal was rooted in Warnock's earlier research at the University of Utah on geometric modeling and PARC's experiments with laser xerography, emphasizing portability and extensibility to foster widespread adoption in emerging desktop environments.
Adobe released the initial version of PostScript in 1984 as a stack-based, Turing-complete programming language specifically designed for printer interpreters. To accelerate market entry, Adobe licensed the technology to Apple Computer in late 1983, integrating it into the Apple LaserWriter, a laser printer introduced in January 1985 that became the first commercial product to ship with a built-in PostScript interpreter. This partnership, bolstered by Apple's $2.5 million investment in Adobe, enabled the LaserWriter to produce typesetter-quality output at 300 dots per inch, dramatically lowering the barriers to high-resolution printing. The combination of PostScript with the Macintosh computer and software like Aldus PageMaker in 1985 ignited the desktop publishing revolution, empowering graphic designers and publishers to create and output professional documents directly from personal computers.

PostScript Level 1

PostScript Level 1, the inaugural version of the PostScript page description language, was released by Adobe Systems in 1984 and served as the foundation for device-independent printing and graphics rendering. Developed by John Warnock and Charles Geschke, it was first implemented in the Apple LaserWriter printer, marking a pivotal advancement in desktop publishing by allowing high-resolution output without reliance on proprietary hardware formats. In December 2022, Adobe released the source code for PostScript 1.0 to the public via the Computer History Museum. The language was formally standardized through Adobe's PostScript Language Reference Manual, commonly known as the "Red Book," which provided the definitive specification for its syntax and operators.
At its core, PostScript Level 1 is a stack-based, dynamically typed programming language influenced by Forth, enabling full programmability for generating complex pages. It utilizes an operand stack for operations, where values are pushed and manipulatedsuch as in the expression 12 34 mul which computes the product and leaves it on the stack. Programmers could implement control structures including loops via the for operator (e.g., iterating from 0 to 10 in increments of 360 degrees for circular drawings) and conditionals with if and ifelse. Dictionaries served as associative arrays for storing named values and procedures, facilitating modular code like defining a variable with /x 5 def.
The graphics model in Level 1 centered on vector-based primitives for scalable rendering, independent of output resolution. Paths were constructed using operators such as newpath, moveto, lineto, and closepath to define shapes, which could then be filled with the fill operator or outlined via stroke. Color support was limited to grayscale, controlled by the setgray operator where values ranged from 0 (black) to 1 (white), ensuring compatibility with early black-and-white laser printers at resolutions up to 300 dpi. However, it lacked data compression and had some device-dependent behaviors in initial implementations, such as font handling tied to specific printers.
Level 1's introduction revolutionized the printing industry by enabling what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) editing in applications like Aldus PageMaker, which debuted in 1985 and leveraged PostScript for precise layout control. This integration with the Macintosh ecosystem democratized professional typography and graphics, reducing dependency on expensive typesetting services and fostering widespread adoption among publishers and designers.

PostScript Level 2

PostScript Level 2, released in December 1990, represented a significant evolution of the PostScript page description language, introducing enhancements focused on color handling, data efficiency, and resource optimization while maintaining upward compatibility with Level 1 implementations. This version was documented in the second edition of the PostScript Language Reference Manual, often referred to as the "Blue Book," which detailed its new operators and features. Building on Level 1's stack-based model, Level 2 expanded capabilities to support more complex document rendering in professional printing environments.
A key advancement in PostScript Level 2 was the introduction of device-independent color models, including CMYK and RGB spaces, enabling precise specification of colors across different output devices. This was facilitated by new color space operators such as setcolorspace and currentcolorspace, which allowed selection and querying of color spaces like DeviceCMYK and DeviceRGB, along with CIE-based spaces for greater accuracy in color reproduction. Additional operators like setcmykcolor, currentcmykcolor, setrgbcolor, and currentrgbcolor provided direct manipulation of these models, supporting applications requiring process color output and improving upon Level 1's grayscale limitations. These features enabled more vibrant and accurate rendering of graphics and images in documents.
Data compression capabilities were substantially improved in Level 2 to handle larger files more efficiently, particularly for images and fonts. The language incorporated LZW (Lempel-Ziv-Welch) encoding via LZWEncode and LZWDecode filters, which provided lossless compression for binary data, streams, and font outlines, reducing transmission and storage needs without quality loss. Run-length encoding was also added through RunLengthEncode and RunLengthDecode filters, ideal for repetitive patterns in images and font bitmaps, further optimizing performance for high-resolution content. These compression methods, applied via image operators like colorimage, allowed for faster processing of complex visuals in printing workflows.
Resource management saw major refinements in Level 2, with enhanced mechanisms for preserving and reusing system states to boost efficiency in memory-constrained environments. The save and restore operators, along with their graphics variants gsave and grestore, enabled encapsulation of virtual memory (VM) states, allowing temporary changes without affecting the global environment and supporting nested operations in complex scripts. Font caching was optimized through operators such as setcachedevice, setcachedevice2, setcacheparams, and cachestatus, which managed bitmap caches in the GlobalFontDirectory using unique identifiers like XUIDs to avoid redundant computations for repeated font rendering. These tools, combined with global VM and garbage collection, minimized overhead for resource-intensive tasks like pattern and path caching.
By the mid-1990s, PostScript Level 2 had become widely adopted in printers and imaging systems, significantly improving performance for complex, color-rich documents compared to Level 1 devices. Its efficiency gains, including faster rasterization and reduced data transfer, made it a standard for professional desktop publishing and prepress applications during this period.

PostScript Level 3

PostScript Level 3, released in 1997, marked the culmination of the language's major evolutionary phase, introducing sophisticated enhancements primarily in color management, font technologies, and imaging operations while building on the foundations of prior versions. This version eliminated the explicit "Level" designation in favor of simply "PostScript 3," reflecting its status as a refined, production-ready standard. No subsequent language levels have been developed or announced by Adobe, underscoring the technology's maturity and stability for high-end applications.
A primary focus of Level 3 was advanced color handling to support professional printing demands. The DeviceN color space enables precise control over multiple spot colorants, facilitating high-fidelity reproductions like PANTONE Hexachrome systems through the setcolorspace operator, complete with overprint simulation. Color rendering dictionaries (CRDs) were expanded to incorporate rendering intents such as Perceptual and RelativeColorimetric, allowing device-specific adjustments via findcolorrendering and integration with CIE-based spaces and halftones. Additionally, smooth shading introduced gradient-based color transitions across objects and regions using seven pattern types (axial, radial, and others), controlled by operators like shfill, setsmoothness, and currentsmoothness for seamless fills and supercell rendering.
Font capabilities saw significant upgrades to accommodate modern typography. Support for OpenType fonts was integrated via FontTypes 9, 10, 11, and 14, encompassing both CFF (Compact Font Format) and TrueType outlines, along with Unicode-compatible CMaps and FontSet resources for efficient handling. Multiple master fonts, an extension of Type 1 formats, permit dynamic instance variations by interpolating design axes like weight and width. The composite font architecture was refined for complex international scripts, emphasizing CID-keyed and Type 0 fonts with nested structures, constructed using composefont and queried via rootfont, alongside operators like glyphshow to bypass encoding limitations.
Imaging enhancements emphasized efficiency and precision for demanding workflows. High-level patterns expanded to include Type 1 (colored tiling) and Type 2 (shading-based) variants, with gradient support through makepattern and setpattern for reusable, device-independent textures. Clipping paths gained flexibility with stack management via clipsave and cliprestore, alongside rectclip, setbbox, and user path operators (upath, ucache, ufill) for bounding complex shapes. Transparency effects were simulated using masked image types (3 and 4), overprint controls like setoverprint, and integration within shading patterns, enabling layered compositions without native live transparency. These features were comprehensively detailed in the PostScript Language Reference, third editioninformally known as the "Green Book"first published in 1999.
As of 2025, PostScript Level 3 continues to underpin professional printing systems, valued for its precise control and output quality in environments like graphic design and high-volume production, even as PDF has largely supplanted it for general document distribution.

The PostScript Language

Syntax and Data Types

PostScript employs a stack-based execution model utilizing reverse Polish notation (RPN), in which operands are pushed onto an operand stack before operators pop them for processing. This postfix notation eliminates the need for parentheses or operator precedence rules common in infix languages, allowing sequential token interpretation by the virtual machine. Tokens in PostScript code include literals such as numbers and strings, as well as composite objects like arrays and dictionaries, all processed in an ASCII-encoded stream unless binary encoding is specified for efficiency.
The language supports several fundamental data types, each designed to facilitate both simple value storage and complex programmatic structures. Integers represent signed whole numbers with a maximum value of 2,147,483,647, while reals handle floating-point values up to 10^38, supporting decimal and exponential notation. Names, often called symbols, are identifiers prefixed with a slash (/) and limited to 127 characters, serving as keys in dictionaries or references to operators. Strings enclose sequences of up to 65,535 characters within parentheses for text or angle brackets for hexadecimal representation, capable of holding binary data. Arrays are ordered collections of up to 65,535 objects, which can be literal or executable as procedures when enclosed in curly braces. Dictionaries store key-value associations with up to 65,535 entries, created using operators like dict or literal notation << >>. Procedures are executable arrays that define reusable code sequences, and marks act as special stack delimiters for grouping operations, such as with counttomark.
PostScript operates as an interpretive virtual machine that executes programs by sequentially processing tokens from an input stream, maintaining state across multiple stacks including the operand, dictionary, and execution stacks. Name resolution occurs by searching the dictionary stack from top to bottomtypically through userdict, currentdict, globaldict, and systemdictto map names to their associated values or executable operators. This stack-based context enables modular execution environments, where entering a dictionary with begin modifies the search path until exited with end.
Error handling in PostScript is integrated into the execution model through built-in operators that allow interruption and recovery. The stop operator halts execution and returns true, enabling trapping via the stopped conditional for debugging or conditional flow. Upon encountering an error, such as stackoverflow, stackunderflow, typecheck, or undefined, the interpreter invokes the handleerror procedure, which can be redefined and populates the $error dictionary with details like the error name, offending command, and object. Errors in binary mode output as a tagged sequence for structured reporting.
For instance, a simple dictionary can be created and accessed as follows:
 /mykey 42 /mydict dict def
 mydict /mykey put
 mydict /mykey get
This sequence defines a dictionary mydict with key /mykey mapped to the integer 42, then retrieves and pushes 42 onto the operand stack. Alternatively, using literal notation:
<< /mykey 42 >> /value get
constructs the dictionary inline and fetches the value.

Operators and Programming Constructs

PostScript operators are the fundamental executable units of the language, consisting of built-in primitives provided by the interpreter and user-defined procedures that extend functionality. Built-in operators perform operations on the operand stack, such as arithmetic functions like add (which pops two numbers and pushes their sum) and mul (which pops two numbers and pushes their product), enabling basic computations without explicit variables. User-defined operators are created by defining procedures using the {} syntax and the def operator, for example, /average {add 2 div} def to compute the average of two numbers, allowing programmers to encapsulate reusable code blocks as named entities that behave like built-in operators.
Control flow in PostScript is managed through conditional and iterative constructs that operate on stack operands or procedures. The if and ifelse operators enable branching: if executes a procedure if a boolean operand is true, while ifelse selects between two procedures based on the condition, as in {true-proc} {false-proc} ifelse. Loops include for, which iterates over a numeric range by executing a procedure for each increment (e.g., 0 10 {add} for to sum values); forall, which applies a procedure to each element in an array or dictionary; repeat, for fixed iterations; and loop for indefinite repetition until a stop or exit intervenes. Recursion is supported by procedures invoking themselves, facilitating algorithms like tree traversals in font procedures, with stack depth limited by interpreter resources to prevent overflow.
PostScript adopts a functional programming style, treating procedures as first-class objects that can be stored in variables, passed as arguments, or returned from other procedures, promoting composable code without side effects in pure functions. Higher-order functions are exemplified by operators like forall, which takes a procedure and applies it iteratively to collection elements, or custom procedures that accept other procedures as inputs for abstraction. Memory management relies on automatic garbage collection in PostScript Level 2 and higher, where the interpreter periodically reclaims inaccessible objects via virtual memory (VM) mechanisms, supplemented by operators like vmreclaim for manual invocation and save/restore for scoped allocation that automatically frees local objects upon restoration. Encapsulation is achieved through dictionaries, which act as namespaces binding keys to values (including procedures and data), accessed via begin and end for scoping or operators like def for definition, as seen in system dictionaries such as userdict for user extensions. Procedures, as a core data type, are executable arrays that support these paradigms by allowing anonymous definitions and dynamic execution.
A simple "Hello World" example illustrates basic operator usage for text output:
%!PS
/Helvetica findfont 12 scalefont setfont
100 100 moveto
(Hello World) show
showpage
This code selects the Helvetica font at 12 points, positions the current point at coordinates (100, 100), displays the string using the show operator, and outputs the page.
For security, PostScript interpreters impose restrictions on operators to mitigate risks from untrusted code, particularly in multi-user environments like printing systems. Sensitive built-in operators, such as those for file access (file) or system parameters (setsystemparams), may be protected by access controls, raising errors like invalidaccess if invoked without authorization; user-defined procedures can be marked executeonly to allow execution but prevent inspection or modification. Additionally, the where operator checks for operator availability in dictionaries, and encrypted sections (e.g., in fonts) further limit exposure, ensuring interpreters can sandbox potentially malicious PostScript programs.

Graphics and Imaging Model

PostScript's graphics and imaging model provides a device-independent framework for describing vector graphics, raster images, and their rendering on output devices. It operates through a sequence of operations that build geometric paths, apply fills or strokes, incorporate bitmapped images, and manage transformations and clipping to produce final page content. This model emphasizes mathematical precision, using affine transformations to ensure scalability without loss of quality, and relies on a stack-based virtual machine for executing these operations.
Central to vector graphics in PostScript is path construction, which defines shapes as sequences of line segments and curves in user space. The moveto operator positions the current point to specified coordinates (x, y), initiating a new subpath. Subsequent points are added using lineto, which draws a straight line from the current point to a new (x, y) location, or curveto, which appends a cubic Bzier curve defined by three control points: the first two for the curve's incoming and outgoing tangents, and the third as the endpoint. These operators allow for the creation of complex, smooth contours, with paths composed of one or more connected or disconnected subpaths; the closepath operator closes the current subpath by connecting the endpoint back to its starting point with a straight line. Coordinates are pushed onto the operand stack for processing, enabling programmatic generation of paths.
Once constructed, paths can be rendered by filling or stroking. Filling encloses the interior of a path according to a rule: the fill operator uses the nonzero winding rule, where regions are filled if the net winding number of path edges around a point is nonzero, preserving orientation for nested shapes; in contrast, eofill applies the even-odd rule, filling areas based on an odd number of edge intersections regardless of direction, which suits alternating patterns like stars. Stroking outlines the path with a line of adjustable width, using the stroke operator, which respects attributes such as line capssetlinecap sets endpoints to butt (square-cut), round (semicircular), or square (projecting)and line joins, controlled by setlinejoin for miter (sharp extension), round (arc), or bevel (angled cut) connections at vertices. Additional parameters like miter limit and dash patterns further customize stroke appearance.
The imaging pipeline integrates raster elements and finalizes output. The image operator renders bitmapped data by sampling pixel values through a transformation matrix, mapping source samples to device space while supporting interpolation for smooth scaling; it accepts data from strings, arrays, or procedures, with parameters specifying dimensions, bits per component, and decoding. For masking, the clip operator intersects the current path with the existing clipping path using the nonzero winding rule, restricting subsequent painting to the resulting region and consuming the path. Page output is triggered by showpage, which paints the accumulated content, erases the page, and reinitializes the graphics state for the next page.
Device independence is achieved via the current transformation matrix (CTM), a 3x3 affine matrix that maps user-space coordinates to device space, incorporating translation, scaling, rotation, and skewing. Operators like translate shift the origin, scale adjusts x and y units, and rotate turns the coordinate axes by degrees; these modify the CTM via concatenation with concat, allowing nested transformations for hierarchical graphics. The initial CTM is set by initmatrix to a device-dependent default, typically 72 units per inch, ensuring consistent rendering across resolutions.
Clipping and compositing complete the model with basic overlay mechanisms, limited to opaque operations in versions prior to Level 3. The clipping path, modifiable by clip or eoclip (even-odd variant), cumulatively narrows the paintable area, retrievable via clippath for further use. Compositing employs simple overpainting, where new marks fully replace underlying content in the current color, without alpha blending or transparency; the setoverprint parameter enables additive overprinting for lines and text in certain contexts, though fills remain opaque. This approach prioritizes reliable, high-fidelity reproduction on printers.

Units, Coordinates, and Device Independence

PostScript defines its primary measurement system in user space, a device-independent coordinate framework where the default unit is the point, equivalent to 1/72 of an inch and commonly called a "big point." This establishes a resolution of 72 points per inch, with the origin positioned at the lower-left corner of the output page or bounding area.
The language operates with two main coordinate systems: user space, which provides abstract, resolution-independent coordinates for content description, and device space, which maps to the specific pixel grid of the target output device. The transition between these systems relies on the Current Transformation Matrix (CTM), which performs affine transformationsincluding scaling, translation, and rotationto adapt user space coordinates to device space while maintaining the integrity of the described geometry.
Device independence is a core principle of PostScript, enabling the same program to produce consistent results across varied hardware by decoupling content specification from physical output characteristics. Resolution can be configured using the setresolution operator or the HWResolution page device parameter, but the actual scaling of graphical elements occurs through CTM adjustments, ensuring that content adapts proportionally to the device's capabilities. Encapsulated PostScript files further support this by incorporating a bounding boxa rectangular extent defined in user space coordinates as which encapsulates the content for reliable rendering without reliance on the full page dimensions of the target device. For instance, a distance of one inch is expressed as 72 points in user space, directly converting physical measurements to the language's native units.
To accommodate different media sizes and preserve aspect ratios, PostScript programs typically handle coordinate setup in the prolog and epilog sections. The prolog initializes the CTM to establish the initial user space orientation and scale relative to the medium, while the epilog applies final transformationssuch as uniform scaling or offset translationsto fit the content within the available page area without distortion. Page device parameters, including PageSize specified as in user space units, guide these adjustments to align with the physical media's dimensions and orientation.

Applications in Printing

Historical Context: Before PostScript

In the mid-20th century, computer printing relied on rudimentary technologies that prioritized text output over graphics or flexibility. Line printers, which emerged in the 1950s, used continuous rolls of paper and hammered fixed character sets via impact mechanisms to produce output, often limited to alphanumeric text and simple ASCII art for decorative or illustrative purposes. Dot-matrix printers, popularized in the 1970s, formed characters and basic graphics by striking pins against an inked ribbon to create dot patterns, offering modest versatility for business documents but struggling with high-resolution images. For professional publishing, phototypesetting systems dominated, with the Lumitype machinedeveloped in 1946 by Ren Higonnet and Louis Moyroudmarking the first successful photographic composition method, projecting fonts from rotating discs onto film or photosensitive paper to enable high-quality typesetting for books and newspapers.
Early graphics output distinguished between vector and raster approaches, with vector plotters leading in precision for technical drawings. California Computer Products (CalComp), founded in 1958, introduced the world's first digital drum plotter in 1959, using pen mechanisms to draw continuous lines on paper under computer control, achieving dominance by manufacturing 80-90% of plotters by 1968 for engineering and architectural applications. In contrast, raster-based systems, inspired by Teletype terminals like the Model 33 from the 1960s, rendered output as fixed grids of characters on impact printers or early CRT displays, mimicking typewriter-like text but lacking scalable imagery. These methods supported scientific visualization but were confined to specialized hardware.
Pre-PostScript printing suffered from significant limitations, including device-specific code that required custom programming for each printer model, eliminating portability across systems. Font scaling was manual and imprecise, often resulting in jagged edges or aliasing at varying resolutions, while high-quality output demanded expensive phototypesetting equipment inaccessible to most users. Overall costs were prohibitive, with early printers exhibiting high complexity, poor reliability, and slow speedssuch as 30 characters per second for dot-matrix modelsfurther compounded by a lack of supporting software for integrated graphics and text.
The advent of personal computing in the early 1980s amplified these challenges, as systems like Apple's Lisa, released in 1983, demanded reliable printing for graphical interfaces but relied on incompatible dot-matrix and daisy-wheel printers that could not fully replicate screen content. This gap created opportunities for innovation at Adobe, founded by former Xerox PARC researchers. Key precursors included Xerox's Interpress, a device-independent printing standard developed from 1979 to 1981 by John Warnock and team, which supported vector graphics and raster imaging for office systems. Similarly, the Scribe markup language, created by Brian Reid in 1980 at Carnegie Mellon University, introduced descriptive tagging for document structure and formatting, enabling automated typesetting and influencing later page description languages. PostScript later addressed these issues by providing a unified, programmable model for scalable output.

PostScript Printing Workflow

A PostScript file is structured into distinct sections to enable efficient interpretation and rendering by printers. The prolog section, marked by the comments %%BeginProlog and %%EndProlog, contains setup code such as procedure definitions (procsets) and resource declarations that apply to the entire document, ensuring reusable operations without generating output. Following the prolog is the script, which includes the document setup (delimited by %%BeginSetup and %%EndSetup), the main content with individual page descriptions, and a trailer section for cleanup, marked by %%Trailer and ending with %%EOF. The Document Structuring Conventions (DSC), a set of standardized comments developed by Adobe, further organize the file for job control; key comments include %%Document for overall metadata, %%Page for starting each page description, and %%PageTrailer for page-specific endings, allowing tools to parse and manage the structure without full interpretation.
Once created, typically by applications like Adobe Illustrator or InDesign, the PostScript file is spooled to a printer queue using protocols such as LPR (Line Printer Remote), a standard for submitting jobs over networks. The print spooler buffers the job, manages queuing for multiple users, and supports operations like pausing or resuming via system commands, ensuring orderly processing even during interruptions.
At the printer, the Raster Image Processor (RIP) interprets the PostScript code, converting vector graphics, text, and images into a device-specific bitmap through scan conversion and halftoning. To handle memory constraints on large or complex pages, the RIP employs banding, rendering the page in sequential horizontal strips rather than loading the entire image at once, which optimizes resource use and prevents overflows.
Error recovery is facilitated by the showpage operator, which finalizes and transmits the current page's rasterized content to the output device, erases the page buffer, and resets the graphics state, allowing the job to proceed to the next page without halting the entire process. If an error occurs mid-page, such as a limitcheck or syntaxerror, the interpreter can invoke handlers from errordict to log details and continue, often printing partial pages via showpage invocation.
In modern digital presses as of 2025, PostScript workflows integrate deeply with advanced RIP software in digital front ends, such as Adobe's PDF Print Engine, enabling hybrid processing of PostScript and PDF files for high-volume production while maintaining device independence and color accuracy across commercial environments.

Font Handling and Type 1 Fonts

PostScript employs outline fonts to achieve scalable, device-independent typography, where glyph shapes are defined mathematically using curves and lines rather than bitmaps, allowing rendering at any resolution without loss of quality. These fonts incorporate hinting instructionsalgorithms that adjust outlines on low-resolution devices to maintain consistent stem widths, alignments, and legibility, such as aligning horizontal features to pixel grids. Hinting is particularly crucial for printers with resolutions around 300 dpi, where it prevents distortions in characters like serifs or thin strokes.
Type 1 fonts, introduced by Adobe in 1985, form the cornerstone of PostScript's font system, consisting of compact PostScript programs that describe glyphs as encrypted binary outlines. The core structure includes the CharStrings dictionary, which stores procedural commands for each glyph's pathsuch as hstem for horizontal stems, vstem for vertical stems, rlineto for relative line-to, and endchar to terminateenabling precise vector-based rendering. Encoding vectors in the font dictionary map character codes (e.g., ASCII values) to specific glyphs, supporting standard encodings like StandardEncoding for 229 characters or ISOLatin1Encoding for 256. Metrics, including advance widths, kerning pairs, and bounding boxes, are provided separately in Adobe Font Metrics (AFM) files, which facilitate layout calculations and are generated from the font's Private dictionary.
Fonts in PostScript can be downloaded to the interpreter's memory during a job, with two storage modes: temporary (volatile) fonts reside in local virtual memory and are discarded upon job completion, restore operation, or power-off to conserve resources; permanent fonts are stored in global or non-volatile memory, persisting across jobs if the device supports it, often via defineresource for repeated use. This distinction optimizes memory usage in printers, where volatile storage handles one-off custom fonts while permanent slots hold frequently used ones.
Key operators manage font selection and application: findfont retrieves a font dictionary by name from the FontDirectory or resources, returning a Type 1 structure ready for scaling; scalefont applies a uniform transformation to the font's size or matrix, producing a modified dictionary; and setfont installs the scaled font into the graphics state for subsequent text output. These operators ensure seamless integration, with errors like invalidfont triggered if the named font is unavailable.
PostScript interpreters bundle Adobe's 35 core Type 1 fontssuch as Times-Roman, Helvetica, Courier, Symbol, AvantGarde-Book, Palatino-Roman, and ZapfDingbatsas predefined resources in the FontDirectory, guaranteeing baseline support without external downloads and enabling portable documents. These fonts, detailed in the PostScript reference appendices, cover essential families for professional typesetting and are preloaded for immediate access across LanguageLevels 1 through 3. Type 1's single-byte encoding limits it to 256 glyphs per font, with extensions like composite fonts addressing broader character sets in subsequent features.

Composite Fonts and Advanced Features

Composite fonts in PostScript enable the efficient handling of large character sets required for complex scripts, such as those in Asian languages, by combining multiple component fonts into a single logical unit. These fonts, introduced as an extension in LanguageLevel 1 and fully integrated in LanguageLevel 2, use a mapping mechanism to associate character codes with glyphs from descendant fonts, supporting both single-byte and multi-byte encodings. Type 0 fonts, a specific subtype of composite fonts with FontType 0, rely on a CMap (character map) resource to map input character codes to glyph identifiers (GIDs) or character identifiers (CIDs) across an array of descendant fonts, which can include CIDFonts or simple Type 1 fonts. This structure allows nesting up to 10 levels deep, facilitating the representation of scripts with thousands of glyphs without exceeding PostScript's dictionary size limits.
CIDFonts serve as the primary descendant components for Type 0 fonts in PostScript, designed specifically for languages like Japanese, Chinese, and Korean that demand extensive glyph repertoires. A CIDFont dictionary includes entries such as CIDSystemInfo (specifying registry, ordering, and supplement), CIDToGIDMap for glyph selection, and metrics arrays for horizontal and vertical writing modes (WMode). They support four subtypes: CIDFontType 0 uses Type 1 charstrings for outlines; CIDFontType 1 employs BuildGlyph procedures for custom glyph generation; CIDFontType 2 incorporates TrueType outlines; and CIDFontType 4 handles bitmapped glyphs via incremental definition with operators like addglyph. For missing glyphs, PostScript substitutes CID 0 by default, ensuring robust rendering. Operators such as composefont, begincidchar, and endcidchar facilitate the creation and use of these fonts, as in the example: /MyCIDFont /MyCMap composefont def, which builds a Type 0 font from CID-keyed descendants.
Multi-master fonts extend the composite model by allowing dynamic variation along design axes like weight, width, or optical size, building on Type 1 or CIDFont bases. Defined with a WeightVector array whose values sum to 1.0 and BlendDesignPositions in the FontInfo dictionary, they enable interpolation between master designs using operators like makeblendedfont. This provides flexibility for generating customized typefaces on-the-fly, particularly useful in high-volume printing where varied styles are needed without multiple font files.
In PostScript LanguageLevel 2 and 3, font resources enhance manageability by treating fonts as named entities in the virtual memory (VM), stored in categories like FontDirectory or GlobalFontDirectory for sharing across jobs. Operators such as defineresource, findresource, and resourceforall allow efficient loading and enumeration, reducing redundancy in multi-page documents. Font subsetting further optimizes file sizes by embedding only the glyphs required for a specific job, achieved through GlyphDirectory entries in CIDFonts or incremental procedures with StartData and addglyph for Type 4 fonts. This approach minimizes memory usage in interpreters while preserving full glyph access when needed.
PostScript supports OpenType fonts with Compact Font Format (CFF) outlines by mapping their Type 2 charstrings to PostScript-compatible representations, embedding CFF data as a FontSet resource in LanguageLevel 2 and 3 files. This compatibility, detailed in Adobe Technical Note #5176, allows interpreters to execute embedded PostScript code in CFF dictionaries for rendering, treating CFF as a compact extension of Type 1 outlines without native Type 9 font support in core PostScript (reserved for PDF).
Advanced features in PostScript LanguageLevel 2 and 3 cater to high-end printing, including overprinting, trapping, spot colors, and plate separations for prepress workflows. Overprinting, controlled by the setoverprint operator (e.g., setoverprint true), prevents erasure of underlying colors when multiple inks overlap, essential for composite printing on Level 2+ devices. Trapping addresses color misregistration by adding thin overlaps or spreads between adjacent objects, implemented via in-RIP processes in LanguageLevel 3 with operators like settrapparams and settrapzone, adjustable from 0 to 8 points. Spot colors are defined using Separation or DeviceN color spaces, as in setcolorspace, enabling precise custom inks like metallics that overprint opaquely. Plate separations generate individual output for each colorant, even on monochrome devices, via setpagedevice parameters such as /Separations true and /SeparationColorNames, supporting up to 250 separations for process and spot inks in professional printing. These features ensure accurate color reproduction and prevent artifacts in production.

Use as a Display System

Display PostScript

Display PostScript (DPS) is an extension of the PostScript language developed by Adobe Systems in 1987 to enable real-time rendering of graphics and text on computer screens in windowed environments. It adapts the core PostScript imaging model for interactive display applications, providing device-independent graphics that unify the representation of content across screens and printers. Initially created in collaboration with NeXT Inc., DPS served as the graphics engine for NeXT workstations, allowing developers to generate high-quality, resolution-independent visuals directly on the display hardware.
DPS operates through server-side interpretation, where PostScript code is executed on the display server to produce consistent what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) output, integrating seamlessly with the X Window System for windowed operations. Key features include event handling for monitoring asynchronous execution states, such as running or input needs, via status events; window management capabilities that support resizing and drawable contexts for efficient updates; and support for anti-aliased graphics through dithered color rendering and the PostScript model's inherent smoothing algorithms. This real-time processing enables smooth interaction in graphical user interfaces, with PostScript contexts managed on the server to handle input/output events without client-side bottlenecks.
Adoption of DPS expanded beyond NeXT to include Sun Microsystems workstations in the early 1990s, following a licensing agreement in 1992 that integrated it into Solaris via the OpenWindows 3.3 release in 1993, replacing Sun's earlier NeWS system. Sun implemented DPS as an extension to the X server, enabling PostScript-based rendering on Unix workstations for applications like Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop. However, performance limitations arose from its software-based interpretation, which struggled with real-time demands on mid-1990s hardware, leading to slower redraws compared to bitmap-based alternatives.
By the mid-1990s, DPS declined in use, supplanted by the rise of the Portable Document Format (PDF) for cross-platform display and the advent of hardware-accelerated graphics in systems like Quartz on macOS, which inherited PostScript concepts but avoided DPS's licensing and security constraints. A key factor in this decline was DPS's security vulnerabilities, as PostScript code could execute arbitrary commands, including file access and shell execution, posing risks in multi-user and networked environments. Sun phased out DPS support in favor of standard X11 extensions and OpenGL, as workstation graphics shifted toward accelerated rasterization.

Implementations and Limitations

Adobe's Display PostScript (DPS) was primarily implemented as a licensed system for Unix workstations, where vendors such as Sun Microsystems and Digital Equipment Corporation integrated it into their operating environments to enable high-quality on-screen rendering using the PostScript imaging model. The core DPS kernel, provided by Adobe in object code format, served as a machine-independent interpreter, allowing original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to adapt it for specific display hardware and windowing systems like X Windows. NeXT Inc. adopted DPS as the foundational graphics engine for its NeXTSTEP operating system, extending it with proprietary enhancements for window management, event handling, and compositing to support real-time display updates. Early previews of what would become macOS, specifically in the Rhapsody interim release for PowerPC-based Macintosh hardware, incorporated DPS elements before transitioning to a PDF-based Quartz imaging model in Mac OS X.
Despite its advantages in device independence, DPS faced notable limitations in practical deployment, particularly its high CPU demands for interpreting PostScript code on-the-fly, which strained 1990s-era processors during complex rendering tasks. The system lacked native support for transparency effects, relying instead on workarounds like overprinting or compositing layers, which complicated design workflows and increased computational overhead. Scalability proved challenging on low-end hardware, as the interpretive nature of PostScript required substantial RAM and processing power to maintain smooth performance at high resolutions, often limiting adoption to professional workstations rather than consumer systems.
In hybrid applications, software like Adobe Illustrator utilized low-resolution raster previews embedded in Encapsulated PostScript (EPS) files to provide on-screen proofing of PostScript artwork, allowing designers to visualize output without full interpretation while reserving the vector PostScript code for high-fidelity printing.
Following the decline of native DPS support after 2000, legacy uses shifted toward emulation in virtual machines and archival display environments to preserve access to historical PostScript-based interfaces, such as those in NeXTSTEP applications running under browser-based emulators. These emulations enable reproduction of original display behaviors for research and preservation, though they do not replicate the real-time performance of contemporary hardware. DPS extensions, such as those for event-driven programming, were briefly referenced in OEM adaptations but saw limited post-2000 development.

Relation to Portable Document Format (PDF)

Development of PDF

In the late 1980s, Adobe Systems recognized limitations in distributing PostScript files, which required a full interpreter to render documents and lacked efficient mechanisms for electronic sharing. To address this, Adobe co-founder John Warnock initiated the Camelot Project in 1990, authoring a white paper that outlined a vision for a new file format derived from PostScript but optimized for portability. The project, led by Warnock alongside co-founder Charles Geschke and a small engineering team, aimed to create self-contained document files that could capture the exact appearance of printed output from any application, transmit them over networks, and allow viewing without needing a PostScript interpreter or specialized hardware. This effort built on PostScript's device-independent imaging model while eliminating its sequential processing requirements, enabling random access to individual pages for faster rendering and navigation.
Adobe released the first version of the Portable Document Format (PDF) 1.0 in June 1993, bundled with Adobe Acrobat 1.0 software for Macintosh, followed by versions for Windows and other platforms later that year. PDF 1.0 achieved the Camelot Project's core goals by producing compact, self-contained files that embedded all necessary fonts, images, and layout instructions, supporting built-in compression algorithms like LZW to reduce file sizes for easier distribution via email or floppy disks. The format's object-based structure facilitated random access, allowing users to jump directly to specific pages without interpreting the entire document, which contrasted with PostScript's stream-oriented execution.
PDF evolved rapidly in its early years to incorporate interactive features. Version 1.1, released in 1994 with Acrobat 2.0, introduced support for external hyperlinks, article threads, and password protection, enhancing its utility for digital workflows. Sound annotations and basic interactive forms (AcroForms) were added in PDF 1.2 in 1996. Subsequent updates built on this foundation, culminating in Adobe's donation of the PDF 1.7 specification to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 2007. ISO published PDF 1.7 as the international standard ISO 32000-1 in July 2008, marking PDF's transition to an open, vendor-neutral format while preserving backward compatibility.
As an evolution of PostScript, PDF represents a structured subset of its imaging operators, retaining vector graphics and font capabilities but omitting full programmability to prioritize security and predictability in rendering. This design choice ensured PDF files could be processed as data rather than executable code, reducing risks in untrusted environments while maintaining PostScript's high-fidelity output.

Key Differences from PostScript

One of the primary distinctions between PDF and PostScript lies in their approach to programmability. PostScript is a full-fledged, Turing-complete programming language that supports executable code, including loops, conditional statements, variables, procedures, and a wide array of operators for dynamic computation and graphics manipulation. In contrast, PDF is a static file format that lacks any programming constructs or executable code; it relies instead on a fixed set of operators applied to structured objects and content streams to describe pages deterministically, without support for runtime evaluation or control flow. This design choice in PDF prioritizes predictable rendering and portability over the flexibility of PostScript's interpretive execution.
The file structures of PDF and PostScript further highlight their divergent architectures. PDF employs a hierarchical, object-oriented format with indirect objects, a cross-reference table, and a trailer dictionary, enabling direct, random access to specific elements and supporting incremental updates without reprocessing the entire file. PostScript, however, consists of a linear, sequential stream of instructions that must be executed from beginning to end, akin to a script, which precludes efficient random access or modular editing. Although both formats share the same core imaging model for device-independent graphics, PDF's structure facilitates viewer applications in extracting and displaying content more efficiently.
In terms of features, PDF introduces document-centric enhancements absent in PostScript, such as hyperlinks for navigation (introduced in PDF 1.1), interactive forms for user input (PDF 1.2), and native transparency support for blending operations (PDF 1.4). PostScript excels in granular graphics control through its programmable operators, allowing complex, device-independent rendering like custom clipping paths and color transformations, but it omits interactive or navigational elements.
Compression mechanisms also differ markedly. PDF applies compression at the object level, using filters such as FlateDecode, LZWDecode, or JPEG for individual streams, images, and metadata, which optimizes storage and transmission while preserving structure. PostScript handles compression primarily at the stream level, often requiring Level 2 or higher for built-in support of algorithms like LZW or JPEG on image data, without the granular object-based efficiency of PDF.
Finally, security features represent a key divergence, with PDF incorporating robust protections from its early versions. Encryption, using algorithms like RC4 with password-based access controls, was introduced in PDF 1.1 to restrict viewing, printing, and editing, while digital signatures for authenticity and integrity verification debuted in PDF 1.3 via signature fields and cryptographic handlers. Standard PostScript lacks any native encryption, digital signatures, or access controls beyond basic object attributes like "readonly" or "noaccess," relying on external mechanisms for protection.

Interoperability and Conversion

Adobe Acrobat Distiller serves as the primary tool for converting PostScript (PS) files to Portable Document Format (PDF), interpreting the programmatic instructions in PS and generating a static PDF representation while processing Document Structuring Conventions (DSC) comments to preserve metadata such as page boundaries and document information. This conversion ensures compatibility in print workflows by embedding fonts and handling vector graphics, though it requires careful settings to avoid issues like over-compression that could alter output fidelity.
For the reverse process, Adobe Acrobat allows exporting PDF files to PostScript format, but this conversion is inherently lossy because PostScript lacks support for certain PDF-specific features, such as interactive forms, annotations, and layered content, which are flattened or omitted during export. As a result, the generated PS file may require re-interpretation by a RIP (Raster Image Processor) to match the original PDF's appearance, potentially introducing discrepancies in complex documents.
Standards like PDF/X facilitate interoperability in print production by defining subsets of PDF optimized for PS-based workflows, ensuring reliable color management, embedded fonts, and no external dependencies that could disrupt PostScript processing. Similarly, Encapsulated PostScript (EPS) acts as an intermediary format, encapsulating PS code within a self-contained structure that can be directly imported into PDF workflows or converted via tools like Distiller, serving as a bridge for vector graphics exchange in design and publishing.
Converting PostScript to PDF presents challenges, including the loss of dynamic elementssuch as conditional execution or interactive scripts inherent in PS's Turing-complete languagewhich are resolved into static content during interpretation, potentially altering behavior in non-print contexts. Font subsetting mismatches also arise, where partial font embeddings in PS may not align with PDF's requirements, leading to substitution errors or missing glyphs if the converter cannot access full font data.
In modern publishing pipelines as of 2025, open-source tools like Ghostscript enable efficient batch conversions between PostScript and PDF, supporting high-volume processing without proprietary dependencies and integrating seamlessly into automated workflows for prepress and archival tasks.

Implementations and Software

Adobe's Official Implementations

Adobe's primary official implementation of PostScript is the PostScript interpreter, a core engine licensed to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) for integration into printers and imagesetters. This interpreter processes PostScript code to generate raster images for output devices, supporting device-independent rendering at resolutions from 300 dpi for standard laser printers to 2400 or 2540 dpi for high-end imagesetters. It has evolved across three language levels: Level 1, released in 1984 as the initial version with basic operators for graphics, fonts, and imaging; Level 2, introduced in 1991 with enhancements for speed, in-RIP color separation, JPEG and CCITT image decompression, composite fonts, caching mechanisms, and advanced screening algorithms including error diffusion for halftoning; and Level 3 (also known as PostScript 3), released in 1997, which added support for over 256 gray levels (up to 4096), direct PDF file handling, DeviceN color spaces for improved separations, and features optimized for web printing.
Complementing the interpreter, Adobe developed drivers and software utilities to facilitate PostScript handling on host systems. The Adobe Type Manager (ATM) is a key driver for on-screen font rendering, generating high-quality bitmaps from PostScript Type 1 and OpenType fonts to ensure smooth scaling and avoid jagged edges on displays. Originally released for Macintosh and later Windows, ATM enables WYSIWYG previewing of PostScript documents and supports printing Type 1 fonts to non-PostScript printers by rasterizing outlines; a free version, ATM Light, was provided for legacy operating systems like Windows 2000/XP and early macOS, though it was discontinued in 2005. Additionally, Adobe's PostScript printer drivers, such as the Adobe Universal PostScript Printer Driver, use PostScript Printer Description (PPD) files to configure output for specific hardware, including HP LaserJet models equipped with PostScript options, ensuring compatibility with Level 1 through 3 features like error diffusion halftoning for high-quality grayscale and color reproduction.
For document workflow, Acrobat Distiller serves as Adobe's official tool for converting PostScript files to Portable Document Format (PDF), providing precise control over resolution, color management, and compatibility settings. It processes PostScript streams generated by applications, supporting all three language levels, with options to enforce Level 3 features like DeviceN separations during distillation; recent versions integrate watched folders for automated batch conversion and security features such as encryption.
Adobe maintained proprietary control over PostScript implementations through licensing agreements with OEMs starting in 1984, treating elements like font hinting as trade secrets to protect intellectual property while enabling widespread adoption in the printing industry. This control persisted until the early 1990s, when Adobe published detailed specifications in the PostScript Language Reference Manual (second edition, 1990) to foster interoperability, effectively establishing PostScript as a de facto international standard without full open-sourcing at the time. In December 2022, Adobe released the source code for PostScript version 1.0 through the Computer History Museum.

Third-Party and Open-Source Alternatives

One of the most prominent third-party implementations of a PostScript interpreter is Ghostscript, developed initially by L. Peter Deutsch in 1988 as an open-source project to provide compatibility with Adobe's PostScript language. Maintained by Artifex Software, Ghostscript serves as a high-fidelity interpreter for PostScript Level 3 and PDF files, enabling rendering, conversion, and printing workflows across various platforms. It is distributed under the GNU Affero General Public License (AGPL) for open-source use, alongside commercial licensing options for proprietary applications.
Ghostscript's architecture includes a PostScript interpreter layer and a graphics library, supporting features like anti-aliased rendering and multiple output formats, making it a de facto standard for non-Adobe PostScript processing. For user interaction, particularly on Windows, GSview provides a graphical user interface (GUI) frontend to Ghostscript, allowing users to view, print, and convert PostScript and PDF files through an intuitive point-and-click interface.
In Unix-like systems, Ghostscript integrates deeply with printing infrastructure, such as the Common Unix Printing System (CUPS), where it powers PostScript filters like pdftops for converting PDF to PostScript and gstoraster for rasterizing PostScript output to printer-ready formats. This integration enables seamless handling of PostScript jobs in Linux and other open-source environments, often serving as the backend for converting complex documents to device-specific data.
Early commercial variants of Ghostscript emerged through Aladdin Enterprises, Deutsch's company, which released versions under the Aladdin Free Public License (AFPL), a permissive license allowing free use for non-commercial purposes while restricting redistribution in commercial products without source code disclosure. These AFPL editions, now superseded by Artifex's dual-licensed model, provided a bridge for commercial adoption before the shift to AGPL in 2013.
Regarding compatibility, Ghostscript adheres closely to standard PostScript specifications, including full support for Document Structuring Conventions (DSC) to parse and structure PostScript files for reliable processing. However, it does not implement certain proprietary Adobe extensions, such as specific in-RIP trapping features or vendor-specific operators, which may require Adobe's reference implementations for complete fidelity. Adobe's interpreters remain the benchmark for full proprietary feature support, though Ghostscript achieves high compatibility for standard workflows.

Supporting Tools and Drivers

Several professional graphics applications support the creation and export of PostScript (PS) files. Adobe Illustrator allows users to export vector artwork directly to Encapsulated PostScript (EPS) format, which is a subset of PostScript suitable for embedding in other documents. Similarly, Adobe InDesign enables the export of entire documents or pages to PostScript or EPS files, facilitating high-quality printing workflows. The Ghostscript suite includes ps2pdf, a command-line utility that converts PostScript files to PDF format while preserving layout and graphics fidelity.
PostScript files can be viewed using dedicated software that leverages PostScript interpreters. GSview, a graphical interface built on Ghostscript, provides tools for previewing, converting, and annotating PS and EPS files on Windows and other platforms. On Linux systems, gv serves as a lightweight PostScript viewer, offering features like magnification, page navigation, and export to other formats. Apple's Preview.app on macOS historically supported partial rendering of PostScript files by converting them internally to PDF, though full compatibility has diminished since macOS Ventura in 2022, requiring third-party tools for comprehensive viewing.
Printer drivers for PostScript devices often rely on PostScript Printer Description (PPD) files to configure output. PPD files define the printer's capabilities, such as supported resolutions, color modes, and paper sizes, enabling applications to generate optimized PostScript code for specific hardware. Microsoft's PostScript printer driver (Pscript) incorporates PPD support to customize printing from Windows applications, ensuring compatibility with a wide range of PostScript-enabled printers.
A variety of command-line utilities assist in editing and managing PostScript files. The psutils package includes tools like psnup for n-up printing (placing multiple pages on a single sheet) and pstops for general page imposition, rearrangement, and scaling, which are essential for booklet production and proofing. Epstool is another utility focused on Encapsulated PostScript, allowing users to compute tight bounding boxes, embed preview images (such as PICT or TIFF), and convert EPS files to bitmaps while maintaining document structure.
As of 2025, legacy PostScript support persists in cloud printing services through specialized conversion tools that integrate with modern workflows. Crawford Technologies' PRO PS converts PostScript print streams to formats like PDF or AFP for cloud-based rendering and distribution. Similarly, RSA's M.I.S. Print transforms legacy datastreams involving PostScript into compatible outputs for cloud printers, aiding migration from older systems. PaperCut's Global Print Driver ensures PostScript compatibility in cloud-managed environments by generating standardized output for secure, driverless printing.

References

Adobe PostScript

PostScript: A Digital Printing Press - CHM - Computer History Museum

The history of Adobe PostScript - Prepressure

PostScript | A page description language - Prepressure

Inventing Postscript, the Tech That Took the Pain out of Printing

Postscript Language Reference Manual - Amazon.com

 A First Guide to PostScript

 PostScript Language Reference Manual

 PostScript Language Reference, third edition - Adobe

PostScript - PrintWiki

Differences Between Adobe PostScript Levels 1, 2, and 3 - ThoughtCo

Acrobat : Support for Adobe PostScript 5

PCL6 vs PostScript: Uncovering the Key Printing Language ...

An Essential Guide to Understanding Printer Languages

A Full Guide to PostScript and PCL Print Languages - Novatech

From Lead to Light: Lumitype, the First Successful Phototypesetting ...

History of Phototypesetting - Museum of Printing

CalComp Inc. - Company-Histories.com

https://members.dcn.org/dwnelson/XeroxStarRetrospective.html

How PostScript Kickstarted Desktop Publishing - IEEE Spectrum

The U.S. Computer Printer Industry

The Lisa: Apple's Most Influential Failure - Computer History Museum

 Introduction to Interpress - Bitsavers.org

 Scribe: A Document Specification Language and Its Compiler - DTIC

 PostScript Language Document Structuring Conventions Specification

Printing with lpr - QNX

Print Spooler Tasks, Problems With Spooling, and Solutions

What does a Raster Image Processor (RIP) do?

Troubleshoot PostScript errors - Adobe Help Center

 Adobe Type 1 Font Format - GitHub Pages

 The Compact Font Format Specification - GitHub Pages

 How to trap using Adobe trapping technologies

 Display PostScript System

https://www.techmonitor.ai/technology/sun_licenses_adobe_display_postscript_for_solaris

 performance aspects of computers - IMPACT

Display Postscript was only used in Rhapsody, the very first releases ...

X Window System At 40 - DSHR's Blog

 Viewing PostScript on a Macintosh - Charles Poynton

Display PostScript

 Porting NEXTSTEP 3.2/3.3 Applications to OpenStep on Solaris

Why do people still use Postscript? - TeX - LaTeX Stack Exchange

Print Center Features - Adobe PostScript vs. Adobe PDF

Infinite Mac

Chapter 2 DPS Features and Enhancements

Evolution of the Digital Document: Celebrating Adobe Acrobat's 25th ...

The Camelot Project - PDF Association

PDF, Version 1.7 (ISO 32000-1:2008) - The Library of Congress

 PDF Reference, version 1.5 - Adobe Open Source

The scope of each PDF version - Prepressure

ISO 32000-1:2008 - Portable document format

 Portable Document Format Reference Manual - Adobe Open Source

 PDF Reference, Second Edition - Adobe Open Source

20 years of transparency in PDF - the Adobe Blog

Adobe PDF settings overview

https://helpx.adobe.com/in/acrobat/desktop/create-documents/explore-advanced-conversion-settings/postscript-to-pdf.html

Is there a way to convert PDF to PostScript?

 PDF/X in a Nutshell

The EPS file format | What is an Encapsulated PostScript file

693037 Fonts missing in .ps to .pdf conversion. - Ghostscript bugs

Ghostscript

Adobe Type Manager (ATM) Light - Generate font bitmaps

https://helpx.adobe.com/acrobat/using/creating-pdfs-acrobat-distiller.html

Ghostscript at 35: A Testament to the Power of Open Source | Artifex

Licensing - Ghostscript

Interpreters - Ghostscript

Obtaining GSview 5.0 - Ghostgum Software

OpenPrinting/cups-filters - GitHub

Aladdin Free Public License (AFPL)

Licensing - Artifex Software

History of Ghostscript versions 6.n - MIT

PostScript files distributed with Ghostscript - MIT

FAQ - Ghostscript

PostScript printing in Illustrator - Adobe Help Center

Create PostScript and EPS files in InDesign - Adobe Help Center

ps2pdf: PostScript-to-PDF converter - MIT

Install gv on macOS with MacPorts

Open PostScript files in Preview in macOS Ventura - The Robservatory

Developing PostScript Printer Drivers - CUPS.org

Microsoft PostScript Printer Driver - Windows drivers

rrthomas/psutils: Utilities for manipulating PostScript documents

Epstool

PRO PS - Crawford Technologies

RSA's M.I.S. Print for LCDS, XES, Metacode transform to PostScript ...

Global Print Driver - PaperCut
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion