Processing Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Processing
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Processing is an open-source programming language and integrated development environment (IDE) designed to facilitate the creation of visually oriented software, particularly for electronic arts, new media, and visual design. Developed by Ben Fry and Casey Reas in 2001 at the MIT Media Lab as a successor to earlier projects like Design By Numbers, it emphasizes simplicity and accessibility to promote software literacy within the visual arts and visual literacy in technology.
Originally conceived as a software sketchbook for teaching programming fundamentals through interactive graphics and animation, Processing has evolved into a versatile tool used by artists, designers, educators, and students worldwide. Its syntax, inspired by languages like BASIC and Logo, allows beginners to quickly prototype ideas with code that generates dynamic visuals, such as shapes, colors, and motion, while supporting more advanced applications through community-contributed libraries for areas like data visualization, computer vision, and hardware integration (e.g., with Arduino). The platform runs cross-platform on macOS, Windows, and Linux, and its free availability has made it a staple in art schools, universities, and high schools, where studies have shown it can double student interest in computer science.
The Processing Foundation, established in 2012, oversees its ongoing development and fosters a global community of contributors, ensuring the project's emphasis on diversity and open-source principles. Notable applications include interactive installations in major museums, educational curricula, and professional creative coding projects, highlighting its role in bridging art and technology.

Overview

Description

Processing is an open-source programming language and integrated development environment (IDE) designed for electronic arts, new media art, and visual design communities. It functions as a flexible software sketchbook that enables users to create visual and interactive applications through a simplified programming approach. Initiated in 2001 by Casey Reas and Ben Fry, who were graduate students at the MIT Media Lab under John Maeda's Aesthetics and Computation Group, Processing emerged as a tool to bridge programming with creative expression.
At its core, Processing is built on the Java platform, compiling sketches into Java bytecode for execution while providing a streamlined syntax that makes it accessible even without prior Java knowledge. This syntax draws inspiration from languages like BASIC and Logo to simplify coding for visual outputs, supporting features such as 2D and 3D graphics rendering, animation through frame-based drawing functions, and interactivity with input devices like the mouse and keyboard. The sketch-based paradigm organizes programs into lightweight, modular filestypically called "sketches"that emphasize rapid prototyping and immediate visual feedback, allowing users to focus on artistic experimentation rather than complex setup.
Processing primarily targets artists, designers, educators, and programming beginners who seek to produce visual and interactive media without requiring deep knowledge of underlying systems or advanced computer science concepts. It is widely used in art schools, universities, high schools, and by professionals in design, architecture, and visual arts to foster software literacy and creative coding skills. This focus traces back to influences like John Maeda's Design By Numbers project from 1999, which pioneered accessible programming for visual thinkers and informed Processing's emphasis on intuitive, graphics-oriented development.

Purpose and Applications

Processing is designed to lower the barriers for non-programmers entering the field of coding by providing a simple, visual-oriented environment that facilitates the creation of interactive graphics, animations, and prototypes. Its primary goals include promoting software literacy within the visual arts and fostering visual literacy in technology, allowing usersparticularly beginnersto experiment with programming concepts through immediate visual feedback rather than abstract syntax. This approach, inspired by accessible languages like BASIC and Logo, enables rapid iteration and encourages creative exploration over rigorous software engineering practices.
Key applications of Processing span generative art, where algorithms produce evolving visual forms; data visualization, transforming complex datasets into intuitive graphics; sound visualization, mapping audio inputs to dynamic displays; and physical computing interfaces, often integrated with hardware like Arduino to control sensors and actuators in real-time. It serves as an educational tool for teaching programming fundamentals through visual outcomes, making abstract ideas tangible and engaging for students in art, design, and computer science courses.
In impact areas, Processing has been employed in museums for interactive exhibits, such as those at the Exploratorium, the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), and the Victoria and Albert Museum, where it powers immersive installations that respond to visitor interactions. In academia, it has been integrated into curricula at universities, art schools, and high schools worldwide, with studies showing it doubles student interest in pursuing further computer science courses. Within industry, particularly UI/UX design and prototyping, Processing supports quick development of interactive mockups and visualizations, aiding architects, designers, and engineers in conceptualizing user experiences.

History and Development

Origins

Processing originated in spring 2001 when Casey Reas and Ben Fry, graduate students at the MIT Media Lab's Aesthetics and Computation Group, sought to create a programming environment tailored for visual artists and designers. As members of John Maeda's research group, Reas and Fry built upon Maeda's earlier Design By Numbers (DBN) project from 1998, which aimed to make programming accessible to non-technical creatives but was limited by its proprietary nature and basic graphical capabilities. They addressed these constraints by leveraging Java's flexibility while simplifying its syntax and setup, enabling rapid prototyping of visual and interactive works without the complexities of traditional software development.
The project emerged as part of Reas and Fry's thesis work at MIT, focusing on bridging computational thinking with artistic expression to empower users untrained in programming. This initiative reflected a broader motivation to democratize technology, drawing from the Media Lab's legacy in exploratory computing tools like the Visual Language Workshop founded in 1975. By fall 2001, Processing was sufficiently developed for initial public engagement, with Fry teaching the first workshop at Musashino Art University in Tokyo.
At its core, Processing was founded on principles of simplicity, open-source collaboration, and the integration of art and technology to foster creative experimentation. Reas and Fry emphasized intuitive tools that prioritized immediate visual feedback over verbose code, encouraging a culture of sharing sketches and libraries to build a supportive ecosystem for learners and practitioners alike. This approach not only lowered barriers for artists engaging with code but also positioned Processing as a catalyst for generative art and design innovation.

Milestones and Releases

Processing's development began with its initial alpha release on August 9, 2001, marking the start of a project initiated by Casey Reas and Ben Fry at the MIT Media Lab. The first stable version, Processing 1.0, was released on November 24, 2008, after years of beta testing and community feedback, providing a mature IDE and language for visual arts programming. This release solidified Processing as an accessible tool, with subsequent minor updates like 1.5.1 on May 15, 2011 focusing on stability for legacy users.
Major version updates introduced significant enhancements. Processing 2.0 launched on June 3, 2013, emphasizing improved performance through better rendering and syntax support, alongside expanded library integration for broader creative applications. Version 3.0 arrived on October 1, 2015, shifting to a modular architecture that facilitated easier extensibility and added native support for platforms like Raspberry Pi with hardware acceleration. Processing 4.0 was finalized on August 9, 2022, incorporating Java 17 compatibility, a redesigned user interface for modern workflows, and optimizations for cross-platform deployment. The latest stable release, 4.3.1 on November 12, 2024, included bug fixes for core functionality and accessibility improvements such as better screen reader integration, followed by 4.4.10 on October 14, 2025, which addressed maintenance issues in the build system.
Organizationally, Ben Fry served as the long-term lead developer since the project's inception, guiding its evolution until his resignation from the Processing Foundation in October 2023 due to disagreements over the organization's priorities and use of donation funds for software development. Fry has continued to contribute to the Processing software independently since then. The Processing Foundation, established in 2012, formalized the shift to fully open-source governance, enabling community-driven development. Since the 2010s, contributions via GitHub have grown, with the main repository fostering collaborative bug fixes, feature additions, and mode enhancements through pull requests and issues.
From 2020 to 2025, developments emphasized steady maintenance over radical changes, with updates to web export tools improving JavaScript mode compatibility for browser-based sketches. Integration with modern hardware, including Raspberry Pi, saw refinements in Processing 3 and later for seamless embedded applications. A notable derivative milestone was the launch of p5.js in 2013, a JavaScript library extending Processing's principles to web development.

Technical Components

Language Features

Processing is a programming language that functions as a simplified subset of Java, optimized for visual and interactive applications within the arts and design fields. Its syntax adopts an imperative style, consisting of straightforward statements to declare variables, perform calculations, and issue drawing commands that render directly to a digital canvas. Central to its structure are predefined functions such as setup(), which runs once at startup to configure initial parameters like canvas size and frame rate, and draw(), which executes in a continuous loop to handle updates and animations at a consistent frame rate, typically 60 frames per second unless adjusted. This looping mechanism provides real-time visual feedback, distinguishing Processing from static programming environments and facilitating rapid iteration in creative workflows.
The language incorporates event-driven paradigms to manage user interactions, featuring built-in handlers like mousePressed() for detecting clicks, mouseMoved() for tracking cursor position via variables such as mouseX and mouseY, keyPressed() for keyboard input, and keyReleased() for release events. Graphics form a core capability, with extensive libraries for 2D primitives including ellipse(x, y, width, height) to draw ovals and rect(x, y, width, height) for rectangles, alongside 3D shapes like box(size) and sphere(radius). Transformation functions such as rotate((/page/Angle)) and translate(x, y) enable spatial manipulations, while color systems support RGB as the default mode and HSB via colorMode(HSB), with utilities like fill(c) and stroke(c) to apply hues, saturation, and brightness values. These elements allow for immediate visual experimentation without complex boilerplate code.
Data handling emphasizes simplicity, supporting primitive types (integers, floats, booleans), arrays declared as int values = {1, 2, 3};, strings for text manipulation, and PImage objects for loading and processing images with functions like loadImage("filename.jpg"). Basic mathematical operations are accessible through functions such as sin(radians) for trigonometric sine and random(low, high) for generating values within a range, supporting procedural patterns and randomness in visuals. Although sketches typically avoid object-oriented constructs for quick prototyping, Processing fully supports Java's object-oriented features, including class definitions, inheritance with extends, and object instantiation using new, enabling modular code organization for larger projects. This blend of imperative sketching and extensible paradigms underscores Processing's role in fostering accessible, frame-rate-driven animations and interactive experiences.

Integrated Development Environment

The Processing Development Environment (PDE) serves as the primary interface for developing sketches in Processing, offering an intuitive layout designed to facilitate rapid prototyping of visual and interactive applications. Key interface elements include a tabbed text editor that supports multiple files per sketch for organizing code, a message area that highlights syntax errors and compiler feedback in real time, a console section for displaying output from functions such as print() and println(), and a dedicated preview window that launches automatically to render 2D or 3D graphics upon execution. This setup emphasizes simplicity, allowing users to focus on creative coding without complex setup.
At its core, the PDE integrates essential tools for compilation, debugging, and distribution. The built-in compiler leverages the Java toolchain to process .pde files into executable bytecode when the Run button is activated, ensuring seamless integration with Processing's Java-based mode. Basic debugging features enable setting breakpoints to pause execution and inspect variable states, accessible through the Debug > Enable Debugger option. Export functionalities, invoked via File > Export Application, generate standalone executables or web-optimized outputs, supporting deployment across platforms without additional configuration.
The workflow in the PDE is centered on efficient sketch management and iteration. Sketches are stored in a dedicated Sketchbook folder, initiated by File > New, with tabs allowing easy switching between files like the main .pde and supporting assets. Auto-completion for built-in functions and variables activates via Ctrl+Space (after enabling in Preferences > Editor), streamlining code entry. Integrated reference access, through Help > Reference or in-editor search, provides instant documentation for libraries and commands, while adding resources like images occurs via Sketch > Add File to populate the data subfolder automatically. The editor also offers syntax highlighting to support Processing's language constructs, aiding readability during development.
Updates in Processing version 4.0 and subsequent releases have enhanced the PDE's usability and consistency. A new Theme Selector (Tools > Theme Selector) introduces customizable color schemes, including dark mode, to reduce eye strain and align with modern development preferences across Windows, macOS, and Linux installations. Cross-platform support has been refined for better consistency, with native compatibility for Apple Silicon and Raspberry Pi architectures, alongside hundreds of bug fixes for interface stability. Font rendering benefits from updated tools like Create Font (Tools > Create Font) and the createFont() function, which generate vector-based fonts for sharper, more efficient on-screen display in the preview window. Workflow improvements include relaxed sketch folder naming rules, configurable via Preferences, to better accommodate version control systems like Git.

Modes and Extensibility

Processing offers several programming modes that extend its core Java-based environment, allowing users to write code in alternative languages while maintaining access to the IDE's visual feedback and tools. The default Java Mode provides the standard Processing syntax built on Java, but additional modes can be installed through the Contribution Manager. Python Mode, developed via the Processing.py project, enables sketches using Python syntax and leverages Jython for compatibility with Processing's Java underpinnings, making it suitable for users preferring Python's readability for prototyping visual ideas.
The p5.js Mode integrates JavaScript support, allowing code written in Processing's style to be exported and run in web browsers via the p5.js library, which translates Processing functions to HTML5 Canvas and WebGL rendering. This mode facilitates seamless transition to web-based creative coding without altering core logic. Android Mode, another official extension, adapts Processing sketches for mobile development on Android devices, incorporating device-specific features like touch input and sensors while compiling to APK files. These modes are managed through the IDE's "Manage Modes" menu, introduced in Processing 4 for streamlined installation and updates.
Extensibility in Processing is primarily achieved through its robust library system, which allows integration of community-contributed code to add functionalities beyond the core graphics and animation capabilities. Libraries are installed via the IDE's Contribution Manager under "Manage Libraries," which connects to a centralized repository of approved contributions. Notable examples include Minim, an audio library for real-time sound synthesis, analysis, and playback, and ControlP5, which provides customizable user interface components like sliders and buttons for interactive applications. Over 200 official and unofficial libraries exist, spanning categories such as video processing, networking, and artificial intelligence; for instance, GSVideo handles video capture and playback using libraries like GStreamer or QuickTime.
Users can further extend Processing by developing custom libraries in Java, which are structured as JAR files with accompanying documentation and examples. These user-defined libraries integrate directly into sketches via import statements and can be shared through the community. The contribution process involves submitting proposals via GitHub issues to the Processing Foundation's contributions repository, where maintainers review and add them to the official list for inclusion in the Contribution Manager. An example of such extensibility is the integration of ml5.js for machine learning in the p5.js Mode, enabling accessible AI features like image classification and pose detection in browser-based sketches without requiring external servers.
From 2020 to 2025, Processing 4 introduced enhancements to mode stability, including better compatibility with Java 17 and fixes for runtime errors in non-Java modes, ensuring more reliable execution across platforms. Updates also refined the library management system, with improved download handling and validation scripts to support growing contributions. While core renderers like P3D already leverage WebGL for 3D graphics, recent community libraries have expanded shader capabilities for advanced visual effects, and efforts toward accessibility include better high-DPI rendering and tooltips in the IDE. These developments, detailed in release notes, underscore Processing's ongoing evolution to support diverse creative workflows.

Practical Usage

Basic Examples

Processing provides a straightforward entry point for beginners through simple sketches that leverage its core structure: the setup() function for initialization and the draw() function for continuous rendering at a specified frame rate. These functions form the backbone of every Processing program, allowing users to create visual output without complex boilerplate code.

Hello World Example

A quintessential starting point is drawing a basic shape, such as an ellipse, to verify the environment is functioning correctly. The following minimal sketch illustrates this:
ellipse(50, 50, 80, 80);
When executed in the Processing IDE, this single line produces a circle centered at coordinates (50, 50) with a diameter of 80 pixels on a default gray background. The setup() and draw() functions are implicitly handled by the IDE for such basic cases, running the code once in setup() to set the canvas and repeatedly in draw() for static output.
To understand the structure, consider an expanded version that explicitly clears the background for consistent rendering:
void setup() {
 size(640, 360);
}

void draw() {
 background(255);
 ellipse(50, 50, 80, 80);
}
Here, setup() establishes a 640 by 360 pixel window, while draw() sets a white background (255 represents full white in RGB values from 0 to 255) and draws the ellipse each frame, preventing artifacts from prior renders. The output is a static white canvas with a black circle in the top-left quadrant. Common pitfalls for beginners include omitting the semicolon at the end of statements, which triggers syntax errors displayed in red in the IDE's message area, or forgetting background() calls, leading to overlapping drawings in looped executions. Running the sketch via Ctrl+R (Cmd+R on macOS) displays the result in a new window; stopping it requires clicking the square stop button or closing the window.

Interactivity Basics

Processing excels in enabling immediate interaction, such as responding to mouse movements, which introduces dynamic behavior without advanced event handling. A fundamental example tracks the mouse position to draw a following shape, demonstrating variables like mouseX and mouseY that automatically update with cursor coordinates relative to the window's top-left origin.
Consider this sketch for a color-changing circle:
void setup() {
 size(480, 120);
}

void draw() {
 if (mousePressed) {
 fill(0);
 } else {
 fill(255);
 }
 (/page/Ellipse)(mouseX, mouseY, 80, 80);
}
In setup(), the window size is set to 480 by 120 pixels. The draw() loop, executing approximately 60 times per second by default, checks if the mouse button is pressed using mousePressed; if so, it fills the ellipse black (0), otherwise white (255). The ellipse() is then positioned at the current mouseX and mouseY. The result is an interactive circle that trails the mouse cursor and toggles color on click, providing visual feedback. Beginners often overlook the need for a background() call if persistence is desired (e.g., to trail the path), as omitting it causes shapes to accumulate; adding background(204); at the start of draw() would clear the canvas each frame. Additionally, mouseX and mouseY remain at their last values if the cursor leaves the window, avoiding erratic jumps.
For drawing lines based on mouse movement, a simpler variant uses pmouseX and pmouseY to connect previous and current positions:
void setup() {
 size(640, 360);
 stroke(255);
}

void draw() {
 background(51);
 line(mouseX, mouseY, pmouseX, pmouseY);
}
This sets a dark gray background (51) and white stroke, drawing a short line segment from the prior frame's mouse position to the current one, creating a trail effect when moved quickly. The output simulates freehand drawing, with line thickness controlled by default settings (1 pixel). A frequent error is not initializing stroke() or background(), resulting in invisible or cluttered lines; testing in the IDE reveals these issues promptly.

Animation Introduction

Animation in Processing arises naturally from the draw() loop's repetition, combined with time-based variables like frameCount, which increments each frame starting from 1 after setup(). This enables smooth motion by updating positions or properties incrementally, typically at 60 frames per second unless adjusted via frameRate().
A basic example animates a circle's horizontal position using the sine function for oscillatory movement:
void setup() {
 size(640, 360);
}

void draw() {
 background(255);
 float x = sin(frameCount * 0.01) * 100 + width / 2;
 ellipse(x, height / 2, 80, 80);
}
The setup() creates a standard window, and draw() clears to white before calculating x as the window's center (width / 2) plus a sine wave offset: sin() takes radians derived from frameCount * 0.01 (a slow multiplier for smooth cycling) scaled by 100 pixels for amplitude. The ellipse centers vertically at height / 2 and oscillates left-right. The output shows a circle waving sinusoidally across the canvas, completing a full cycle roughly every 628 frames (since 2 radians 6.28, and 0.01 scaling yields 628 steps). To set a consistent pace, add frameRate(30); in setup() for 30 FPS. Pitfalls include choosing too large a multiplier (e.g., 0.1 causes rapid flickering) or neglecting background(), which leaves a growing trail; beginners should experiment with values in the IDE to observe effects, using println(frameCount); in draw() to monitor timing in the console.

Advanced Applications

Processing has been extensively applied in data visualization to handle and render complex datasets, leveraging built-in functions like loadTable() for CSV files and loadJSONObject() for JSON parsing to create dynamic charts and graphs. For instance, a typical workflow involves loading a JSON dataset containing fields such as species names and population metrics, extracting values with methods like getString() and getInt(), and plotting them as interactive bar charts or scatter plots using Processing's drawing primitives; this approach enables real-time updates based on user input or live data streams.
In interactive installations, Processing integrates seamlessly with hardware like Arduino to create responsive physical computing environments, where sensor data drives visual outputs. A representative case study is an ultrasonic sensor-based project where Arduino captures distance measurements via serial communication, mapping them to parameters such as animation speed and line thickness in a Processing sketch that generates spiraling geometric patterns; user proximity alters the artwork in real time, demonstrating Processing's role in bridging digital visuals with physical interaction.
Generative art in Processing often employs advanced techniques like recursion and Perlin noise to produce organic, evolving patterns without explicit user control. An advanced sketch might use recursion to draw self-similar structures, such as branching trees, by defining a function that calls itself with scaled-down parameters until a base case is reached, combined with Perlin noise for natural variation for example, generating terrain-like forms where noise values, computed as noise(x * 0.01), modulate branch angles or densities to mimic fluid, non-repetitive growth.
Notable projects highlight Processing's impact in artistic practice. Jared Tarbell's Substrate (2003) simulates crystal growth on a computational grid using iterative perpendicular line extensions governed by simple rules, structured around loops that spawn and propagate line segments until a density threshold is met, resulting in intricate, city-like emergent structures across resolutions like 900x900 pixels with 350 objects. Similarly, Joshua Davis's works, such as those utilizing his HYPE library for Processing, explore algorithmic image-making through vector-based interactions and dynamic frameworks, enabling early web art experiments with randomized particle systems and layered compositions that evolve based on procedural rules.

Ecosystem

Related Software Projects

Several software projects have extended Processing's visual programming paradigm to web browsers, other programming languages, and hardware platforms, enabling broader accessibility and integration.

Web and JavaScript Adaptations

p5.js, released in 2013 and led initially by Lauren Lee McCarthy, provides a JavaScript library for creating browser-based interactive sketches inspired by Processing's simplicity, targeting creative coding in web environments without plugins. In 2021, Qianqian Ye and evelyn masso assumed co-leadership of the project, continuing its development under the Processing Foundation. Earlier, Processing.js, introduced in 2010 by John Resig, translated Processing sketches to JavaScript for web execution but was deprecated in 2017 due to native browser support for technologies like Canvas and WebGL.

Python Implementations

Processing.py, launched in 2012 by Jonathan Feinberg, integrates Processing with Python using Jython, allowing sketches to leverage Python's libraries while maintaining Processing's syntax for graphics and interactivity. More recent alternatives include P5Py and py5, both developed as CPython-based ports that avoid Jython's limitations; py5, created by Jim Schmitz in 2020, notably supports Jupyter notebooks for interactive coding and data visualization.

Bindings for Other Languages

Quil, a Clojure wrapper developed starting in 2011, ports Processing's API to Clojure, enabling functional programming approaches to generative art and animations on the Java Virtual Machine. JRubyArt (formerly ruby-processing), initiated by Jeremy Ashkenas in 2009, adapts Processing for Ruby via JRuby, facilitating rapid prototyping with Ruby's expressive syntax for visual applications. Similarly, Spde, a Scala project from 2009, provides a development environment and library for Processing-style coding in Scala, emphasizing type safety and concurrency in creative projects.

Hardware and Mobile Extensions

Wiring, introduced in 2005 by Hernando Barragan as a precursor to Arduino, offered a simplified programming environment for microcontroller-based prototyping that integrated directly with Processing for sensor data visualization and control. Processing supports Arduino hardware through Firmata, a serial communication protocol established in 2007, which allows desktop sketches to send and receive data from Arduino boards without custom firmware. Fritzing, an open-source tool released in 2010, complements Processing by enabling circuit diagramming and breadboard prototyping, often used to design hardware interfaces visualized in Processing sketches. For mobile development, Processing supports Android through an official mode since around 2010, and third-party efforts like Processing-iOS enable limited support for iOS, allowing touchscreen-based interactive applications with Processing's core libraries.

Community and Education

The Processing Foundation, established in 2012 as a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization, oversees the ongoing development and stewardship of the Processing project, fostering its growth through grants, fellowships, and community support programs. The foundation promotes software literacy in the visual arts and visual literacy in technology, drawing on a global community of tens of thousands of students, artists, designers, researchers, and hobbyists who engage with the platform. This community collaborates via dedicated forums on Discourse for discussions and troubleshooting, as well as the project's GitHub repository, where users submit pull requests to enhance libraries, tools, and core functionality under the open-source model.
Contributions from the community extend beyond code to creative outputs, with users sharing sketches and projects through exhibitions and galleries featured on the official Processing website, showcasing interactive art and visualizations. Collaborative events such as hackathons, game jams, and workshops encourage collective experimentation in creative coding, often centered on themes of art, technology, and social issues. The annual Processing Community Day, initiated by the foundation, brings together participants worldwide for workshops, lectures, and discussions on computational creativity, with events held in cities like Copenhagen, Pittsburgh, Aarhus, and Porto to promote accessible learning and networking.
In education, Processing is integrated into curricula at institutions such as the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD) and New York University (NYU), where it supports courses in digital media, interactive design, and computational arts, enabling students to prototype ideas through visual programming. Free resources bolster this role, including online tutorials, example sketches available on the Processing site, and textbooks like Learning Processing by Daniel Shiffman, which provides a beginner-friendly introduction to programming concepts through animation and interaction.
From 2020 to 2025, the community has seen increased emphasis on online learning, particularly through p5.jsa JavaScript library derived from Processingthat facilitates web-based creative coding education and broadens access for remote learners and educators. As of 2025, updates to libraries like p5.js (reaching version 1.9) continue to enhance the ecosystem. The Processing Foundation has advanced diversity initiatives by investing in programs that expand access to technology and arts communities for underrepresented groups, including fellowships and advocacy for equitable participation in creative coding. These efforts underscore sustained engagement, reflected in the platform's role as a foundational tool for teaching computational thinking across diverse educational settings.

Recognition

Awards

In 2005, Casey Reas and Ben Fry received the Golden Nica in the Net Vision category at the Prix Ars Electronica for their development of Processing, recognizing its innovative approach to enabling visual arts through programming. That same year, the Processing project also earned the Interactive Design Prize from the Tokyo Type Directors Club, highlighting its impact on creative coding and design education.
In 2011, Ben Fry was awarded the National Design Award for Interaction Design by the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum, for his contributions to data visualization and tools like Processing, which he co-created with Reas. Casey Reas has received further recognition in art-technology fields, including the 2020 Lumen Prize Moving Image Award for his audiovisual work exploring generative processes, building on the foundations of Processing.
Established in 2012, the Processing Foundation has provided ongoing grants and fellowships to artists, educators, and technologists, supporting projects that advance creative coding and software literacy within underrepresented communities. These initiatives, such as the annual Processing Fellowships, have funded dozens of multidisciplinary works since inception, fostering innovation in digital arts.
These accolades underscore Processing's pivotal role in democratizing access to digital art and programming, bridging technical and creative domains for broader audiences.

Cultural and Media Impact

Processing has significantly influenced generative and interactive art movements by providing artists with accessible tools for creating dynamic visual works based on algorithms and real-time interaction. Developed in 2001 by Casey Reas and Ben Fry, it has empowered creators to explore computational aesthetics, fostering a shift toward software-based art practices that blend code with visual expression. This influence is evident in major festivals, where Processing sketches have been showcased in SIGGRAPH art programs, including primers and generative installations that demonstrate its role in computational arts education and exhibition. Similarly, interactive installations at events like Burning Man have utilized Processing to produce immersive, algorithm-driven experiences in public settings.
The language has received notable media coverage that highlights its role in democratizing creative coding. Featured in books like Daniel Shiffman's The Nature of Code (2012, revised 2024), which uses Processing to simulate natural systems and has become a cornerstone for teaching algorithmic design, it underscores the tool's pedagogical impact on digital creativity. Documentaries such as Hello World! Processing (2013) explore its contributions to creative coding, examining how process, experimentation, and algorithms shape artistic output within global communities. Interviews with creators Reas and Fry in Wired magazine, including discussions on Processing as the "lingua franca of creative coding" (2015) and its evolution in version 2.0 (2013), have further amplified its cultural significance in bridging art and technology.
Beyond art, Processing has inspired broader applications in data visualization and journalism, with co-creator Ben Fry leveraging it for innovative infographics that inform public discourse on complex datasets. Its integration into maker culture promotes hands-on experimentation, while initiatives by the Processing Foundation, such as fellowships emphasizing inclusive STEM toolkits, support underrepresented groups in engineering and computer science by fostering belonging through creative coding.
In recent years (20202025), Processing's adaptability has driven its use in NFT art, where generative sketches on platforms like OpenProcessing enable on-chain creation of unique digital collectibles, aligning with blockchain-based artistic economies. During the COVID-19 pandemic, it facilitated virtual exhibitions, allowing artists to develop interactive online installations amid physical closures. Collaborations involving the Processing Foundation, including Casey Reas's involvement in MoMA's 2021 Modern Dream project with Refik Anadolwhich interpreted the museum's collection via machine learning and NFTshighlight its ongoing role in institutional digital art initiatives.

Licensing and Availability

License Details

Processing's core library, which includes the language libraries essential for visual and interactive programming, is released under the GNU Lesser General Public License version 2.1 (LGPL-2.1). This license allows users to modify and distribute the library freely, link it with proprietary software without requiring the entire application to be open-sourced, but mandates that any changes to the library itself be made available under the same terms.
In contrast, the Processing Development Environment (PDE), the integrated development environment, along with other components such as tools and examples, falls under the GNU General Public License version 2 (GPL-2.0). The GPL requires that derivative works based on these components be distributed under the same license, ensuring source code availability and promoting collaborative development. This setup supports free use, modification, and redistribution, including for commercial purposes, provided the copyleft conditionssuch as sharing modificationsare met.
Additionally, the reference documentation, including JavaDoc comments, is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) license, permitting non-commercial sharing and adaptation with attribution while requiring derivatives to use the same terms.
While the core components adhere to these licenses, some contributed libraries within the Processing ecosystem may operate under alternative open-source licenses, such as the Apache License 2.0, allowing for varied compatibility in extensions and integrations. The Processing Foundation maintains oversight to ensure overall compliance and consistency in the project's open-source ethos.

Platforms and Distribution

Processing is distributed as free, open-source software, available for download directly from the official website at processing.org. Installers are provided for major desktop operating systems, including Windows (via .msi or .zip files), macOS (via .dmg files supporting both Apple Silicon and Intel architectures), and Linux (via .tar.gz archives or Snap packages for distributions like Ubuntu and Raspberry Pi OS). Portable versions are supported through zip and tar.gz downloads for Windows and Linux, allowing users to run the IDE without a traditional installation by extracting the archive and launching the executable.
The primary supported platform is desktop environments on Windows, macOS, and Linux, where the Processing Development Environment (PDE) runs natively. Sketches created in Processing can be exported to the web using p5.js, a JavaScript library derived from Processing for browser-based execution. For mobile and embedded systems, support is available through related projects such as Processing for Android (enabling APK exports) and modes for Raspberry Pi, though these require additional setup beyond the core desktop distribution. The IDE bundles OpenJDK 17 for 64-bit systems, ensuring compatibility with Java 8 and later versions for sketch compilation and execution, while maintaining backward compatibility for older Java features in user code.
Installation is streamlined for ease of use, typically involving a one-click process: users download the appropriate installer, execute it (e.g., running the .msi on Windows or dragging the app to the Applications folder on macOS), and the bundled Java runtime is automatically included, eliminating the need for separate JDK installation. Updates to the core IDE are handled by downloading and installing new releases from the official site or GitHub, with the built-in Contribution Manager facilitating updates for libraries, modes, and tools within the IDE. Archives of older versions, such as Processing 4.3 and earlier, are maintained on GitHub for users requiring legacy compatibility or specific features.
Accessibility features include the IDE's intuitive interface designed for beginners, with documentation available in multiple languages through the Processing website and community resources, though the PDE interface itself is primarily in English. The Processing Foundation supports ongoing development through voluntary donations, which can be made via their official site to fund maintenance and enhancements. For developers, source code and pre-release builds are hosted on GitHub, with the latest stable release being version 4.4.10 from October 2025, enabling custom builds and contributions.

References

Overview / Processing.org

Download Processing / Processing.org

Welcome to Processing! / Processing.org

Processing Overview / Processing.org

Visualization with Arduino and Processing

A Modern Prometheus. The History of Processing by Casey Reas

Coding with Processing Release 0001 Alpha -- Happy 20th!

Processing Launches Version 1.0 - WIRED

Releases / Processing.org

Processing 2.0 released - WIRED

Processing 3.0 has been released - WIRED

Announcing the latest version of Processing, Processing 4! - Medium

Announcing the Release of Processing 4.3.1! - Medium

Ben Fry resigning from the Processing Foundation - Community

processing/processing4 - GitHub

Releases processing/processing4 - GitHub

installing processing - Raspberry Pi Forums

https://processing.org/reference/setup_.html

https://processing.org/reference/draw_.html

https://processing.org/reference/ellipse_.html

Reference / Processing.org

Objects / Processing.org

Environment / Processing.org

Changes in 4.0

createFont() / Reference / Processing.org

Python Mode for Processing

fathominfo/processing-p5js-mode: A simple editor for p5.js ... - GitHub

Libraries / Processing.org

https://processing.org/reference/libraries/sound/

processing/processing-contributions - GitHub

https://github.com/processing/processing4/releases/tag/processing-1309-4.4.9

https://github.com/processing/processing4/pull/1038

Getting Started / Processing.org

mouseX / Reference

frameCount / Reference

sin() / Reference

loadTable() / Reference

loadJSONObject() / Reference

Interactive Art Project - Arduino

https://processing.org/examples/noise1d/

Substrate | Gallery of Computation - Complexification.net

Joshua Davis on The Great Discontent (TGD)

Processing Foundation Grants

Announcing New Roles at Processing Foundation - Medium

Processing Community Day @ Worldwide - Processing Foundation

Processing Community Day Copenhagen 2021

2024 Learning To Teach Creative Technologies with Generative AI

https://learningprocessing.com/

Books / Processing.org

Education Resources - p5.js

Processing Foundation

Prix Ars Electronica 2005: Statement of the Jury in the Net Vision ...

Casey Reas + Ben FryProcessingAWARD - Tokyo TDC

2011 National Design Award Winners

Professor exhibits artwork focused on creative artificial intelligence

Processing Foundation Fellowships

It only took 162 attempts, but Processing 1.0 is here! - writing | ben fry

Bridging the gap between art and code - Newsroom | UCLA

Muse in the Machine | National Endowment for the Arts

Processing.org: Programming for Artists and Designers by Reas ...

The Art of Code. How to turn your coding skills into art - Anna Carey

Daniel Shiffman - NYU Tisch School of the Arts

Hello World! Processing on Vimeo

Meet Processing, the Lingua Franca of Creative Coding | WIRED

Processing 2.0, a short introduction - WIRED

Processing: A Programming Handbook for Visual Designers and ...

Announcing Processing Foundation Fellowship 2023 Mentors!

Fellowships 2021 - Processing Foundation

How generative artists are coding NFTs - OpenProcessing

Modern Dream: How Refik Anadol Is Using Machine Learning and ...

https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.en.html

https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html

https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/

Questions regarding open source licensing - Processing Forum

Download Processing

benfry/processing4: Processing 4.x releases for Java 17 - GitHub

https://github.com/processing/processing4/wiki/Legacy-Installation-Instructions-(pre-4.4

https://github.com/processing/processing4/releases/tag/processing-1310-4.4.10
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion