Python (programming language) Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 days ago 
Python (programming language)
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Python is a high-level, interpreted, and general-purpose programming language renowned for its emphasis on code readabilityits syntax resembles plain English and relies on indentation for code blocks rather than braces or other symbolssimplicity, and dynamic semantics, making it suitable for rapid development and expressive coding. This design makes Python particularly accessible to beginners and non-programmers, including professionals such as doctors and others without prior coding experience, who can quickly learn the language to automate repetitive tasks, analyze data (such as patient records and reports), and process information efficiently. Due to its simplicity and ease of use, Python is widely regarded as the most popular programming language, ranking first in the TIOBE Index as of February 2026 with a rating of 21.81% and a lead of over 10 percentage points. It was created by Guido van Rossum during the Christmas holidays of 1989 while working at Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands, initially as a successor to the ABC language with influences from practical scripting needs in the Amoeba operating system project. The first version, Python 0.9.1, was publicly released on February 20, 1991, marking the beginning of its widespread adoption. Python is open-source, licensed under an OSI-approved permissive license that allows free use, modification, and distribution, even for commercial purposes. Since 2001, it has been stewarded by the non-profit Python Software Foundation (PSF), which promotes its development, protects its intellectual property, and supports the global Python community through grants, conferences, and educational initiatives. Its versatility spans numerous domains, including web development, data analysis and sciencewhere it is the primary language used by most practitioners in data science and machine learningautomation, scientific computing, artificial intelligence, and software prototyping, bolstered by a rich standard library and access to thousands of third-party packages via the Python Package Index (PyPI). The latest version, Python 3.14.3, was released on February 3, 2026, including bug fixes and minor improvements following the initial 3.14.0 release on October 7, 2025, which introduced enhancements in performance, error messages, and new language features to further improve developer productivity.

History

Origins and Development

Guido van Rossum, a Dutch programmer, created Python while working at the Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands during the late 1980s. As a researcher at CWI, a national research institute for mathematics and computer science, van Rossum sought to develop a new programming language that addressed limitations he observed in existing tools for scripting and system administration tasks. His background in programming, including contributions to the Amoeba distributed operating system, informed his vision for a language that would be both powerful and accessible.
The primary motivations for Python's creation stemmed from van Rossum's desire for a successor to the ABC programming language, which he had worked with at CWI and found overly restrictive in areas like extensibility and file handling. ABC emphasized teaching and simplicity but lacked the flexibility needed for practical scripting, prompting van Rossum to design Python with a focus on code readability, ease of use, and the ability to interface with operating systems. This approach aimed to combine ABC's structured style with greater extensibility, making it suitable for rapid prototyping and automation in research environments.
Early prototypes of Python began in December 1989 as a hobby project during van Rossum's Christmas holidays, when he had extra time to experiment without formal constraints. Over the following year, he developed the initial interpreter and core features while continuing his primary work at CWI, treating Python as a side endeavor that gradually gained traction among colleagues. The initial goals included support for interpreted execution to enable interactive development, dynamic typing to reduce boilerplate code, and an indentation-based structure to enforce readability without additional delimiters. These elements were intended to make Python intuitive for beginners while powerful enough for complex applications.
Key milestones in Python's early phase include its first public release on February 20, 1991, as version 0.9.0, which was posted to the alt.sources Usenet group and included foundational features like classes, functions, and exception handling. By 1995, van Rossum transitioned his work on Python to the Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI) in the United States, where development continued under CNRI's ownership and a permissive open-source license, marking its shift from a CWI project to a broader collaborative effort. This transition facilitated wider adoption and community contributions, influencing subsequent evolutions of the language.

Release History

Python's release history began with version 1.0 in 1994, introducing foundational features such as lambda functions, map, filter, and reduce for functional programming support. This version laid the groundwork for Python's growth, with subsequent minor updates like 1.5 in 1999 enhancing stability and performance.
The transition to the 2.x series came with Python 2.0, released on October 16, 2000, which introduced significant innovations including list comprehensions, garbage collection, and Unicode support, making it a major milestone in the language's evolution. Python 2.7, released on July 3, 2010, served as the final major release in the 2.x line, incorporating backports of features from Python 3.x such as ordered dictionaries and improved compatibility tools to ease the migration process.
Python 3.0, released on December 3, 2008, represented a fundamental redesign aimed at addressing design flaws in earlier versions, resulting in backward-incompatible changes such as print becoming a function and integer division defaulting to float results. This shift created significant challenges for the community, as much existing code written for Python 2.x required porting to run on 3.x, leading to a prolonged coexistence of both series; the "Python 2 sunset" officially ended support for Python 2 on January 1, 2020, encouraging full adoption of Python 3.
Subsequent Python 3.x releases have built on this foundation with incremental improvements. For instance, Python 3.5, released on September 13, 2015, introduced async and await keywords for asynchronous programming, along with matrix multiplication operators and enhanced unpacking generalizations. The latest major version, Python 3.14, had its initial release (3.14.0) on October 7, 2025, introducing enhancements such as improved type hinting, experimental free-threaded build mode, and further performance improvements. The most recent patch release, Python 3.14.3, was issued on February 3, 2026, incorporating bug fixes and minor improvements.
Since Python 3.6, released in December 2016, the Python core team has adopted an annual release cadence for major versions, typically occurring in October, to deliver timely enhancements while maintaining stability. Each major release receives five years of support, including phases for bug fixes (initially about two years), security updates (additional about three years), and eventual end-of-life, ensuring long-term viability for production use; for example, Python 3.10, released in October 2021, is scheduled for end-of-life in October 2026. After end-of-life, versions like Python 3.6, which reached it on December 23, 2021, present challenges: package repositories have dropped support, many libraries and dependencies no longer build or support it, leading to compatibility issues and limited ecosystem access; attempts to compile from source are often unreliable and time-consuming due to incompatibilities with modern systems.

Naming and Logo

The name "Python" for the programming language originates from the British comedy series Monty Python's Flying Circus, rather than the snake, as its creator Guido van Rossum was reading the published scripts of the show during the late 1980s while developing the language. Van Rossum selected the name in 1989 for its brevity, uniqueness, and slightly mysterious quality, aiming to infuse the project with a sense of humor and memorability.
The official Python logo, featuring a stylized pair of snakes in blue and yellow, was introduced in 2006 and designed by Tim Parkin, whose intellectual property rights were assigned to the Python Software Foundation (PSF) in 2007. Subsequent refinements included vector formats such as SVG, which enhance scalability for digital and print use, with versions available through official PSF resources.
Branding guidelines for the Python logo are managed by the PSF to protect its trademark status and ensure consistent representation. The official colors include Python Blue (#3776AB) for the primary snake elements and Python Yellow (#FFD343) for accents, as derived from the logo design, with usage encouraged in documentation and promotions while avoiding alterations without permission. Derived logos or color changes require approval from the PSF Trademarks Committee via email to , and the foundation defends against confusing or damaging uses to maintain brand integrity.
The choice of name has fostered a lighthearted cultural impact within the Python programming community, inspiring references to Monty Python in code examples (such as using "spam" and "eggs" as variable names) and contributing to memes that highlight the language's approachable, fun ethos during events like conferences. This humorous legacy encourages community engagement without direct ties to reptilian themes, reinforcing Python's identity as an accessible tool for developers.

Design Philosophy

Core Principles

The foundational design philosophy of Python is encapsulated in "The Zen of Python," a collection of 19 aphorisms outlined in PEP 20, authored by Tim Peters to guide the language's development toward clarity and elegance. Key principles include "Beautiful is better than ugly," which promotes aesthetically pleasing and maintainable code over convoluted structures, and "Simple is better than complex," encouraging straightforward solutions that avoid unnecessary abstraction while allowing complexity only when flat simplicity would be insufficient. Another core tenet, "Readability counts," underscores the importance of writing code that is easy for humans to understand, influencing decisions like favoring explicit over implicit behaviors to reduce ambiguity. These aphorisms collectively shape Python's code style, fostering a culture where developers prioritize intuitive and expressive programming.
A hallmark of Python's design is its strong emphasis on code readability, enforced through significant whitespace via indentation, which delineates code blocks without relying on braces or keywords. This syntactic choice, as detailed in the language's tutorial, groups statements logically and promotes consistent formatting, making code visually structured and easier to parse at a glance. The official style guide, PEP 8, further reinforces this by recommending specific indentation practices, such as using four spaces, to enhance uniformity and readability across projects.
Python adheres to a "batteries included" philosophy, providing a comprehensive standard library that equips developers with a wide array of modules for common tasks, thereby minimizing the need for external dependencies. This approach, articulated in PEP 206, ensures that the language distribution includes versatile tools for areas like data processing, networking, and file handling, promoting productivity and portability.
At its core, Python is dynamically typed, interpreted, and garbage-collected, supporting multiple programming paradigms including procedural, object-oriented, and functional styles. The dynamic typing allows variables to hold values of any type without explicit declarations, while the interpreter executes code directly and the garbage collector automatically manages memory by reclaiming unused objects. This flexibility enables developers to mix paradigms seamlessly, such as using procedural scripts alongside object-oriented designs.

Influence from Other Languages

Python's design was significantly shaped by the ABC programming language, developed at the Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in the 1980s, which emphasized simplicity, structured programming, and ease of use for non-expert programmers. Guido van Rossum, Python's creator, drew from ABC's focus on readability and high-level abstractions while addressing its limitations, such as extensibility and performance issues, to create a more versatile language. Additionally, Modula-3 influenced Python's module system and overall elegance, providing a model for clean, modular code organization without excessive complexity. The language also incorporated elements from C, particularly for low-level integration through extensions and some syntactic conventions, enabling Python to interface efficiently with system-level code.
In comparisons to contemporaries like Perl, Python deliberately prioritized explicitness and readability over Perl's flexibility, which often allowed multiple ways to accomplish the same task, potentially leading to cryptic code. Python shares dynamic typing and functional programming aspects with Lisp, such as higher-order functions, but with a syntax that favors clarity and reduces verbosity.
Early development of Python was impacted by Unix shell scripting traditions, fostering its suitability for automation and scripting tasks through straightforward command-line integration and process handling. Influences from C++ informed Python's object-oriented programming features, adopting concepts like classes and inheritance but streamlining them to avoid the boilerplate and strictness found in that language.
A key differentiator in Python's design is its use of indentation to define code blocks, rejecting the brace-enclosed structures common in C and similar languages to enforce consistent readability and reduce visual clutter. This approach, inspired by ABC's structured formatting, makes Python more accessible for beginners while maintaining the precision needed for complex programs.

Syntax and Semantics

Basic Syntax Elements

Python's syntax is designed to emphasize readability and simplicity, making it accessible for beginners while remaining powerful for advanced users. One of the defining features is its use of indentation to delineate code blocks, rather than relying on braces or keywords like in many other languages. This mandatory whitespace usage enforces a consistent coding style, typically employing four spaces per indentation level, and mixing tabs with spaces raises a TabError to prevent inconsistent formatting.
Comments in Python serve to document code without affecting execution, with single-line comments beginning with the hash symbol (#) and extending to the end of the line, while multi-line comments are conventionally implemented using triple-quoted strings (''' or """) that are not assigned to variables, often referred to as docstrings when placed at the module, class, or function level for automated documentation generation.
Variable assignment in Python uses the simple equals operator (=), supporting dynamic typing where variables do not require explicit type declarations and can hold any object, such as assigning an integer with x = 5.
To incorporate external functionality, Python employs import statements that bring modules into the current namespace, using syntax like import module or from module import name to access specific attributes without qualification.
Basic error handling is managed through try-except blocks, which allow code to attempt execution and catch exceptions for graceful recovery, structured as try: followed by a block and one or more except clauses to handle raised errors.

Data Types and Structures

Python's built-in data types encompass a variety of primitive and composite structures designed for simplicity and efficiency in handling common programming tasks. The language supports numeric types such as integers and floating-point numbers, along with booleans and strings, each with specific behaviors that promote readable code.
Integers in Python are arbitrary-precision, meaning they can represent values of unlimited size without overflow, unlike fixed-size integers in many other languages; for example, the value 2**1000 is handled seamlessly. Floating-point numbers adhere to the IEEE 754 standard for double-precision, providing approximate representations for real numbers, as seen in literals like 3.14. Booleans are a subclass of integers, with True evaluating to 1 and False to 0, enabling logical operations and conditional expressions. Strings are immutable sequences of Unicode characters, enclosed in single or double quotes, and come equipped with methods such as .split() for dividing a string into a list based on delimiters, like "hello world".split() yielding .
Python supports type hints for optional static type checking, which annotate variables, parameters, and return types without runtime enforcement. Since Python 3.10, union types can be denoted using the | operator, such as int | str in function signatures like def func(x: int | str) -> None:. In Python 3.13, type hint improvements include defaults for TypeVar, ReadOnly annotations for TypedDict, and the TypeIs operator for refined isinstance checks.
For composite data structures, Python provides mutable and immutable collections to manage groups of elements effectively. Lists are ordered, mutable sequences created with square brackets, such as my_list = , allowing in-place modifications like appending or slicing; for instance, my_list.append(4) alters the list to . Tuples, in contrast, are immutable ordered sequences defined with parentheses, like my_tuple = (1, 2, 3), which cannot be changed after creation but can be unpacked or used in iterations. Dictionaries are mutable mappings of key-value pairs, using curly braces with colon-separated entries, such as {'name': 'Python', 'version': 3.12}, supporting fast lookups via hashable keys. Sets are unordered collections of unique, hashable elements, created with set() or curly braces for literals, ideal for membership testing and operations like union or intersection.
Type conversion in Python is facilitated by built-in functions that enable explicit casting between types, while implicit conversions occur in specific contexts like arithmetic operations between integers and floats. For example, int('42') converts the string '42' to the integer 42, and str(42) does the reverse, whereas adding 1 + 1.0 implicitly promotes the integer to a float, resulting in 2.0; attempting int('abc') raises a ValueError to prevent invalid conversions.
Mutability is a core concept distinguishing Python's data types: mutable objects like lists and dictionaries can be altered in place without creating a new object, as demonstrated by my_list = 10 changing the first element, whereas immutable types such as strings and tuples return new instances on modification attempts, like 'hello' = 'H' raising a TypeError. This design encourages careful handling to avoid unintended side effects in functions or assignments.
The None type serves as a special singleton representing the absence of a value, often used as a default return for functions or to initialize variables, and it evaluates to False in boolean contexts; for example, a function without an explicit return statement implicitly returns None.

Control Flow Statements

Python's control flow statements enable decision-making and repetition in program execution, allowing code to respond dynamically to conditions and iterate over data structures. These mechanisms rely on indentation to define code blocks, promoting readability without the need for braces or keywords like "end." The primary constructs include conditional statements, loops, exception handling, and the match statement (introduced in Python 3.10 for structural pattern matching), which integrate seamlessly to manage program logic.

Conditional Statements

Conditional statements in Python use the if, elif, and else keywords to execute code blocks based on boolean expressions. The if statement evaluates a condition; if true, its indented block runs. Multiple elif (else if) clauses allow checking additional conditions sequentially, and an optional else clause handles cases where no prior conditions are met. This structure supports nested conditions for complex decision trees. For example:
x = int(input("Please enter an integer: "))
if x < 0:
 print('Negative changed to zero')
elif x == 0:
 print('Zero')
elif x == 1:
 print('Single')
else:
 print('More')
This example demonstrates user input validation with cascading conditions.

Loops

Python provides two main loop types: for and while. The for loop iterates over items in any iterable, such as lists or strings, processing each element in sequence. It is ideal for known iteration counts and uses the range() function for numeric sequences. The while loop repeats as long as a condition remains true, suitable for indeterminate iterations. Both loops can include an optional else clause that executes if the loop completes without interruption. For instance:
words = 
for w in words:
 print(w, len(w))
And for while:
a, b = 0, 1
while a < 10:
 print(a, end=' ')
 a, b = b, a + b
These examples illustrate iteration over sequences and conditional repetition.

Loop Control Keywords

Within loops, break, continue, and pass modify execution flow. The break statement exits the innermost loop prematurely, useful for early termination. continue skips the current iteration and advances to the next, bypassing remaining code in that cycle. pass serves as a no-operation placeholder, required syntactically but performing nothing, often used during development. Example with break:
for n in range(2, 10):
 for x in range(2, n):
 if (/page/Modulo):
 print(f"{n} equals {x} * {n//x}")
 break
For continue:
for num in range(2, 10):
 if num % 2 == 0:
 print(f"Found an even number {num}")
 continue
 print(f"Found an odd number {num}")
And pass:
while True:
 pass # Busy-wait for keyboard interrupt
These keywords enhance loop flexibility without altering the core iteration logic.

Exception Handling Integration

Exception handling uses try, except, else, finally, and raise to manage errors as part of control flow, preventing abrupt program termination. The try block encloses potentially erroneous code; if an exception occurs, control shifts to a matching except block for handling. The optional else runs only if no exception arises, while finally ensures cleanup code executes regardless. The raise keyword explicitly triggers exceptions, allowing custom error flows. For example:
(/page/Exception_handling_syntax):
 (/page/Exception_handling_syntax) (/page/Exception_handling_syntax)('This is an error message.')
(/page/Exception_handling_syntax) Exception as e:
 print(f'Caught an exception: {e}')
(/page/Exception_handling_syntax):
 print('Finally block executed')
This integrates error detection with normal execution paths, using exceptions for non-local control transfer.

Match Statements

Introduced in Python 3.10, the match statement provides structural pattern matching to compare a value against multiple patterns, extending beyond simple switch-like behavior in other languages. It takes an expression (subject) and compares it to successive patterns in case blocks, executing the first matching block. Patterns can include literals, variables, sequences, mappings, and guards with if conditions. For example:
def http_error(status):
 match status:
 case 400:
 return "Bad request"
 case 404:
 return "Not found"
 case 418:
 return "I'm a teapot"
 case _:
 return "Something's wrong with the internet"
This example handles HTTP status codes efficiently.

Functions and Modules

Defining Functions

In Python, user-defined functions are created using the def keyword followed by the function name and parentheses containing parameters, which allows for modular and reusable code. The basic syntax is def function_name(parameters):, where the function body is indented and executed when the function is called. For example, a simple function to add two numbers might be defined as def add(a, b): return a + b, enabling the programmer to encapsulate logic and promote code readability. According to the official Python documentation, this declaration creates a callable object that can be invoked with arguments matching the parameters.
Parameters in Python functions can be positional, meaning they are assigned based on the order of arguments passed during the call, or keyword-based, where arguments are specified by name for clarity and to avoid order dependency. Default parameters allow functions to have optional arguments with predefined values, such as def greet(name, message="Hello"):; if no value is provided for message, it defaults to "Hello". For handling a variable number of arguments, Python supports (/page/Variadic_function) for positional arguments (collecting them into a tuple) and (/page/Variadic_function) for keyword arguments (collecting them into a dictionary), as in def flexible_func(*args, **kwargs):. These features, detailed in the Python language reference, provide flexibility in function design without requiring multiple function signatures.
Functions return values using the return statement, which immediately exits the function and sends back the specified value (or values, packed as a tuple for multiples, like return x, y); if no return is encountered, the function implicitly returns None. This mechanism supports both void functions for side effects and value-returning ones for computation, with the returned tuple enabling multiple outputs in a single call, such as calculating and returning both sum and product. The official documentation emphasizes that return values can be of any type, including complex objects, enhancing Python's expressiveness in data processing tasks.
Python's scoping rules distinguish between local variables (defined within the function and accessible only there) and global variables (defined outside and accessible via the global keyword if modification is needed inside the function). For nested functions, the nonlocal keyword (introduced in Python 3.0) allows inner functions to modify variables from the enclosing scope, preventing the creation of a new local variable. These rules, as outlined in the Python execution model, ensure predictable variable resolution using the LEGB (Local, Enclosing, Global, Built-in) hierarchy, which helps avoid common errors in function composition.
Lambda functions provide a concise way to define anonymous, single-expression functions, typically for short operations like sorting or mapping, using the syntax lambda parameters: expression, for instance lambda x: x * 2 to double a value. They are particularly useful in higher-order functions but are limited to one expression without statements, making them ideal for simple, inline computations. The language reference notes that lambdas are functionally equivalent to def-defined functions but prioritize brevity in functional programming patterns.
Decorators offer a way to modify or enhance functions non-invasively using the (/page/Python_syntax_and_semantics) syntax above the function definition, where the decorator is itself a function that takes and returns a function. For example, (/page/Wrapper_function) might wrap a function to measure its execution time, effectively composing behavior like logging or caching. This feature, introduced in Python 2.4 and expanded in later versions, leverages function objects' first-class status to enable aspect-oriented programming without altering the original code, as described in the official tutorial.

Modules and Packages

In Python, a module is a single Python source file (with a .py extension) containing code such as functions, classes, variables, and other objects, allowing code to be organized into reusable units. When a .py file is executed directly, the special built-in variable __name__ is set to "__main__", enabling conditional execution of code that should only run when the file is used as a script rather than imported. This idiom, often written as if __name__ == "__main__":, prevents the top-level code from executing during imports, promoting reusabilityfor instance, a module might contain functions that are imported elsewhere, but also include test code or a main entry point that runs only when invoked directly.
The import system in Python facilitates loading modules by searching for them and binding their contents to the current namespace. The basic import statement, such as import module_name, loads the entire module and makes it available via its name, while from module_name import specific_item imports only selected names (like functions or variables) directly into the current scope. Best practices recommend preferring explicit imports over wildcard imports (from module_name import *) to avoid namespace pollution and improve code clarity and maintainability. Aliases can be assigned using import module_name as alias or from module_name import item as alias to shorten references or avoid naming conflicts. For packages, relative imports use dots (e.g., from .subpackage import item) to reference siblings or submodules without absolute paths, which is particularly useful in larger projects to maintain structure independence.
Packages extend modules by organizing them into hierarchical directories, treated as packages when they contain an __init__.py file (optional in Python 3.3+ for namespace packages), which can be empty or include initialization code executed upon import. A package is thus a directory containing one or more modules and possibly subpackages. This file signals to Python that the directory should be recognized as a package, allowing imports like from package.module import function. Since Python 3.3, namespace packages have been supported, enabling a single logical package to span multiple physical directories without requiring __init__.py in each, which is useful for distributing subpackages separately while maintaining a unified namespace.
When organizing utility functions in a project, common best practices include using a single utils.py module for a small number of simple utilities. For numerous or complex utilities, organize them as a utils/ package with an __init__.py file and submodules (e.g., utils/common.py, utils/string.py). Place utilities inside the main project package (e.g., src/myproject/utils/) rather than at the root level. For installable packages, the src/ layout is recommended, placing importable code under a src/ directory to separate source from other project files, avoid import inconsistencies between development and installation, and reduce risks of circular dependencies. Prefer explicit imports (e.g., from utils.common import func), descriptive names, and avoid wildcard imports.
Standard practices for working with modules and packages include managing the module search path via sys.path, a list of directories where Python looks for modules during imports; this can be modified programmatically (e.g., sys.path.append('/custom/path')) to include local or project-specific directories. Circular imports, where two or more modules depend on each other, can lead to errors like ImportError and should be avoided by refactoring shared code into a separate module, using lazy imports (e.g., inside functions), or restructuring dependencies to break the cycle.
For distributing modules and packages, setuptools serves as a key tool, historically extending the now-removed distutils module from the standard library, to simplify building, packaging, and installing projects via a setup.py file that specifies metadata like name, version, and dependencies. This enables creating distributable formats such as source distributions or wheels, facilitating sharing code without delving into installation mechanisms. Modules often contain functions to encapsulate reusable logic, enhancing modularity within these structures.

Object-Oriented Programming

Object-oriented programming (OOP) in Python is based on core concepts: classes (blueprints for creating objects), objects (instances of classes), encapsulation (data hiding), inheritance (code reuse), polymorphism (same method different behaviors), and abstraction (hiding complexity). These concepts remain unchanged in recent Python versions up to Python 3.14.
Python supports object-oriented programming through its class mechanism, which provides features such as encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism, enabling developers to model real-world entities and their relationships in code. Classes in Python are defined using the class keyword, followed by the class name and a colon, with the class body containing methods and attributes indented within. The __init__ method serves as the constructor, automatically called upon instance creation to initialize the object's state, and it conventionally takes self as its first parameter to refer to the instance itself.
Instance attributes are variables unique to each object, typically set within methods like __init__ using self, such as self.value = 42, while class attributes are shared across all instances and defined directly in the class body, like class_attribute = "shared". Methods are functions defined inside the class that operate on instances via the self parameter, and Python employs naming conventions rather than strict access modifiers for encapsulation: a single underscore prefix (e.g., _private) indicates non-public attributes intended for internal use, while a double underscore (e.g., (/page/Name_mangling)) triggers name mangling to prevent accidental subclass overrides.
Inheritance allows a class to derive from one or more base classes, with single inheritance specified as class Derived(Base): and multiple inheritance as class Derived(Base1, Base2):, where attributes are resolved by searching the derived class first, then the base classes in order. The super() function facilitates calling methods from parent classes, particularly in multiple inheritance scenarios, by following the method resolution order (MRO), which linearizes the inheritance hierarchy to ensure each base class is invoked exactly once while preserving the specified order.
Special methods, also known as magic methods, enable operator overloading by defining how objects interact with built-in operations; for example, __str__ customizes the string representation returned by str() or print(), while __len__ defines the behavior of the len() function to return an integer representing the object's size. These methods allow classes to emulate built-in types, such as making a custom container respond to length queries or provide readable output.
Polymorphism in Python is achieved through duck typing, a style where an object's suitability for a role is determined by the presence of required methods or attributes rather than its explicit type, allowing flexible substitution of compatible objects without inheritance hierarchies. This approach, exemplified by the adage "If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, then it must be a duck," promotes code reusability by focusing on behavior over type checks, often using hasattr() or try-except blocks instead of isinstance().
The following simple example demonstrates class definition, the __init__ method, instance attributes, methods, and object instantiation in Python:
class Dog:
 def __init__(self, name):
 self.name = name

 def bark(self):
 print(f"{self.name} says Woof!")

# Object instantiation
my_dog = Dog("Buddy")

# Method call
my_dog.bark() # Outputs: Buddy says Woof!
In this example:

class Dog: defines the class.

def __init__(self, name): is the constructor, called automatically on instantiation.

self.name = name sets an instance attribute unique to each object.

def bark(self): defines a method that accesses the instance attribute via self.

my_dog = Dog("Buddy") creates an instance of the class.

my_dog.bark() invokes the method on the instance.

This illustrates fundamental OOP mechanisms in Python.
For organizing OOP code across files, classes can be defined in modules, which are imported as needed.

Standard Library and Ecosystem

Built-in Functions and Types

Python provides a rich set of built-in functions and types that are always available in the interpreter without requiring any imports, forming the core foundation for basic programming tasks. These elements emphasize simplicity and readability, allowing developers to perform common operations efficiently. The official documentation lists these in alphabetical order for easy reference.
Among the essential built-in functions, print() outputs formatted representations of objects to the standard output stream, making it fundamental for debugging and user interaction; for example, print("Hello, World!") displays the string on the console. The len() function returns the number of items in an object supporting length queries, such as strings or lists, as in len() which yields 3. type() identifies the type of an object, useful for runtime checks, like type(42) returning (/page/Python_syntax_and_semantics). Similarly, id() provides the unique integer identifier for an object during its lifetime, aiding in understanding object identity, such as id("test") producing a memory address-like integer.
Python's built-in types include fundamental categories that handle various data representations. The bool type represents boolean values True and False, constructed via literals or functions like bool(). Numeric types encompass int for arbitrary-precision integers, created with int() or literals like 42; float for floating-point numbers, via float() or literals like 3.14. The str type manages immutable sequences of Unicode characters, instantiated with str() or string literals such as "hello". Collection types include list for mutable ordered sequences, built with list() or ; tuple for immutable ordered sequences, using tuple() or (1, 2, 3); dict for mutable mappings of keys to values, created via dict() or {'key': 'value'}; and set for mutable unordered collections of unique elements, with set() or {1, 2, 3}.
Utility functions enhance common operations on iterables. range() generates immutable sequences of numbers, often used in loops, like range(5) producing 0 through 4. enumerate() returns an iterator of tuples with indices and values from an iterable, as in list(enumerate()) yielding . zip() combines multiple iterables into tuples of corresponding elements, such as list(zip(, )) resulting in . For sorting, sorted() returns a new sorted list from an iterable, while reversed() provides an iterator yielding elements in reverse order.
Global built-in functions support introspection and environment inspection. dir() returns a list of valid attributes for an object, helping explore available methods, like dir(list) listing list methods. help() invokes the interactive help system, displaying documentation for modules, classes, or functions, such as help(print). globals() returns a dictionary of the current global symbol table, useful for examining the namespace.
Error handling relies on built-in exceptions derived from the Exception base class, which serves as the parent for most standard exceptions. Common built-in exceptions include ValueError, raised when a function receives an argument of the correct type but improper value, such as attempting int("abc").

Key Standard Library Modules

Python's standard library includes a rich collection of modules that provide essential functionality for various programming tasks without requiring external dependencies. These modules are distributed with every Python installation and cover areas such as file handling, data processing, networking, mathematics, and concurrency, enabling developers to build robust applications efficiently.

File I/O Modules

The os module offers a portable interface for interacting with operating system-dependent functionality, including file and directory operations, path manipulations, and environment variables. It provides functions like os.path.join() for constructing paths in a platform-independent manner and os.listdir() for listing directory contents, making it indispensable for cross-platform file system access. The sys module complements this by providing access to interpreter-specific variables and functions, such as sys.path for module search paths and sys.argv for command-line arguments, which are crucial for system-level scripting and error handling. For stream-based input/output operations, the io module supplies classes like io.StringIO and io.BytesIO for in-memory text and binary streams, as well as buffered I/O wrappers that enhance performance over direct file operations.

Data Handling Modules

Data serialization and exchange are facilitated by the json module, which encodes and decodes JSON data using functions such as json.dumps() for converting Python objects to JSON strings and json.loads() for the reverse, supporting common data interchange formats. The csv module handles comma-separated values files through classes like csv.reader and csv.writer, allowing for robust parsing and writing of tabular data while managing dialects and quoting rules to ensure compatibility with various formats. Time-related data manipulation is supported by the datetime module, which includes classes such as datetime.datetime for combined date and time objects and datetime.timedelta for duration calculations, enabling arithmetic operations like adding days to a date.

Networking Modules

For HTTP and URL handling, the urllib package encompasses submodules like urllib.request for opening and retrieving data from web resources via functions such as urllib.request.urlopen(), and urllib.parse for breaking down URLs into components, providing a foundation for web interactions without external libraries. Low-level network communication is enabled by the socket module, which interfaces with the BSD socket API to create TCP/UDP connections using methods like socket.socket() for instantiation and socket.connect() for establishing links, suitable for building custom network protocols.

Math and Utilities Modules

Mathematical computations are accessible through the math module, which exposes C-standard functions for trigonometry (e.g., math.sin() and math.cos()), logarithms, and constants like math.pi, operating on floating-point numbers for precise calculations. Pseudo-random number generation is provided by the random module, featuring functions such as random.randint() for integer ranges and random.choice() for sequence selection, useful for simulations and sampling while supporting seed-based reproducibility. Advanced container types are offered by the collections module, including collections.deque for efficient appends and pops from both ends, collections.Counter for counting hashable objects, and collections.defaultdict for dictionaries with automatic default values, extending built-in data structures for optimized performance in specific scenarios. These modules often integrate with built-in functions like len() or sorted() to enhance their utility in everyday programming tasks.

Multithreading Modules

Concurrency via threads is managed by the threading module, which builds on low-level primitives to offer high-level constructs like the threading.Thread class for creating and managing threads, along with synchronization tools such as threading.Lock to prevent race conditions in shared resource access. For process-based parallelism, the multiprocessing module enables spawning of separate Python processes using classes like multiprocessing.Process and inter-process communication via multiprocessing.Queue, bypassing the Global Interpreter Lock to achieve true parallelism on multi-core systems.

Third-Party Packages

Python's ecosystem is significantly enhanced by third-party packages, which are community-contributed libraries and modules that extend the language's capabilities beyond the standard library. These packages are primarily managed and distributed through dedicated tools and repositories, enabling developers to easily install, update, and share code for various applications.
The primary tool for installing third-party packages is pip, a package installer that retrieves software from the Python Package Index (PyPI), the official repository hosting a vast collection of Python packages. Pip allows users to install packages with commands like pip install package_name, handling dependencies automatically to ensure compatibility. To isolate project dependencies and prevent conflicts between different projects or Python versions, developers use virtual environments created via the venv module in the standard library; for example, python -m venv myenv sets up an isolated environment where packages can be installed without affecting the global Python installation.
Among the most popular third-party packages are NumPy, which provides support for large, multi-dimensional arrays and matrices along with mathematical functions to operate on them, making it essential for numerical computing. Pandas builds on NumPy to offer data structures like DataFrames for efficient data analysis and manipulation, widely used in data science workflows. The Requests library simplifies HTTP requests, enabling easy interaction with web services and APIs through intuitive syntax. For web development, Django is a full-featured framework that follows the model-template-view architectural pattern to build robust applications, while Flask provides a lightweight, flexible microframework for smaller projects.
PyPI serves as the central distribution platform for Python packages, allowing developers to upload and discover open-source contributions easily. For scientific and data-intensive stacks, Conda offers an alternative package and environment manager that can handle non-Python dependencies, such as C libraries, making it particularly useful for complex installations in fields like machine learning and bioinformatics. As of January 2026, PyPI hosts over 700,000 packages, reflecting the rapid growth and vibrancy of the Python community.
Best practices for managing third-party packages include using a requirements.txt file to document project dependencies, which can be generated with pip freeze > requirements.txt and used to recreate environments via pip install -r requirements.txt. This approach helps in handling version conflicts by explicitly specifying compatible versions, such as pinning to exact releases (e.g., package==1.2.3) or allowing flexible ranges (e.g., package>=1.2), ensuring reproducible builds across development, testing, and deployment.

Implementations

CPython

CPython is the reference implementation of the Python programming language, written primarily in C and serving as the default interpreter since its initial release in 1991. It compiles Python source code into bytecode, which is then executed by the Python Virtual Machine (PVM), a core component that manages the runtime environment and handles low-level operations such as object management and instruction dispatching. As the canonical implementation, CPython ensures compatibility with the Python language specification and is the foundation for most Python distributions worldwide.
At its core, CPython's architecture revolves around the PVM, which interprets bytecode instructions generated from Python scripts, enabling platform-independent execution while interfacing directly with the host operating system. Memory management in CPython employs a combination of reference counting for immediate object deallocation and a generational garbage collector to detect and resolve reference cycles that could lead to memory leaks. This hybrid approach provides efficient automatic memory handling, with the collector periodically scanning for cycles among objects that maintain mutual references, ensuring robust resource cleanup without manual intervention.
For performance and concurrency, CPython incorporates the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL), a mutex that serializes access to Python bytecode execution across multiple threads, thereby maintaining thread safety in the presence of shared interpreter state. This design simplifies implementation but limits true parallelism in multi-threaded CPU-bound applications. Additionally, CPython supports extensions through its C API, allowing developers to write performance-critical modules in C or C++ that integrate seamlessly with Python code, exposing native functions and data structures for enhanced speed and functionality.
CPython is distributed as the standard interpreter in most Python installers, available for download from the official Python website, and its open-source code is hosted on GitHub for public access and contribution. Users can obtain pre-compiled binaries for various platforms or build from source, ensuring broad accessibility across operating systems.
Maintenance of CPython is closely tied to Python's release cycle, managed by the core development team through the python/cpython repository, with ongoing optimizations enhancing runtime efficiency. For instance, Python 3.11 introduced the "Faster CPython" project improvements, achieving up to 10-60% speed gains over Python 3.10 through specialized accelerations in adaptive interpreter techniques and just-in-time compilation prototypes. These updates are documented in official release notes, reflecting a commitment to iterative performance enhancements while preserving backward compatibility. While alternative implementations exist for specific environments, CPython remains the de facto standard for general-purpose Python usage.

Bytecode decompilation

As of March 2026, decompilers for .pyc files produced by CPython 3.13 are available. The online tool pychaos.io supports decompilation of CPython bytecode for versions 3.11 to 3.14, with support for 3.14 added in October 2025. Tools such as pycdc have ongoing development, with initial support for Python 3.13 added in 2024 and continued updates through 2025. Decompyle3 lists support up to Python 3.13 in its PyPI classifiers (latest release October 2025), though its documentation emphasizes testing primarily on earlier versions such as 3.7 and 3.8.

Alternative Implementations

While CPython serves as the reference implementation of Python, several alternative implementations have been developed to target specific environments, such as integration with other runtime systems or optimization for performance and resource constraints.
Jython is a Java-based implementation of Python designed to run on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), enabling seamless integration with Java libraries and applications. It provides full access to Java classes from Python code and compiles Python scripts into Java bytecode for execution on the JVM. The latest stable release, Jython 2.7, maintains compatibility with Python 2.7, though efforts are ongoing to support Python 3 features.
IronPython is an open-source implementation of Python that targets the .NET Common Language Runtime (CLR), allowing Python code to interact directly with .NET assemblies and frameworks. It supports Python 2.7 fully and has partial compatibility with Python 3.x syntax and features through its 3.4 release. IronPython is particularly useful for Windows development and cross-platform .NET applications, but it may not support the full Python standard library due to .NET-specific constraints.
PyPy is a just-in-time (JIT) compiling implementation of Python that focuses on improving runtime performance over CPython, often achieving significant speedups for compute-intensive tasks. Built using the RPython translation toolchain, it supports both Python 2.7 and Python 3.x (up to 3.11 as of 2025) and is compatible with most standard library modules. PyPy is widely used in high-performance scenarios, such as web servers and scientific computing, though it may require adjustments for C extensions reliant on CPython's API.
MicroPython is a lightweight implementation optimized for microcontrollers and embedded systems, featuring a subset of Python 3 that runs with minimal memory and processing requirements. It includes a small portion of the standard library tailored for hardware interactions, such as GPIO and I2C, making it suitable for IoT devices and robotics. MicroPython trades full compatibility for efficiency on resource-limited hardware.
Cython extends Python by allowing the addition of static typing and direct calls to C code, compiling Python-like code into efficient C extensions that can be imported into CPython. While not a full standalone interpreter, it serves as an alternative for performance-critical code by bridging Python and C, supporting Python 3.x compatibility. Cython is commonly used to accelerate numerical computations and integrate with existing C libraries, but it requires compilation steps and may limit dynamic Python features for speed gains.
These alternative implementations often involve trade-offs in compatibility, such as partial standard library support or version-specific limitations, to prioritize niche applications like JVM integration, .NET ecosystems, embedded devices, or performance enhancements.

Applications and Uses

Scientific Computing and Data Science

Python has become a cornerstone in scientific computing due to its powerful ecosystem of libraries that facilitate numerical computations and data visualization. Python has established itself as the predominant language in data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence, with surveys and industry indices consistently ranking it as the top choice in these fields. NumPy provides efficient multi-dimensional array objects and tools for mathematical operations, enabling high-performance numerical analysis essential for scientific simulations and data processing. SciPy builds upon NumPy by offering modules for optimization, integration, interpolation, linear algebra, and statistical functions, which are widely used in solving complex scientific problems such as differential equations and signal processing. Matplotlib complements these by providing flexible plotting capabilities, allowing researchers to create publication-quality visualizations of data and results from numerical experiments. SymPy provides capabilities for symbolic mathematics, including modules for physics applications. Specialized libraries include PyChrono for multibody dynamics and rigid body simulations and QuTiP for the simulation of open quantum systems dynamics.
Numerous free and open-source resources exist for scientific computing and physics simulations in Python. For example, the "Physics Simulations in Python" lab manual by Daniel V. Schroeder covers topics such as projectile motion, pendulums, orbits, and molecular dynamics using VPython and Matplotlib. Curated lists such as the awesome-scientific-python repository on GitHub provide extensive collections of scientific Python tools and resources.
In data science, Python's stack supports comprehensive workflows for data manipulation and exploration. Pandas introduces data structures like DataFrames for handling structured data, supporting operations such as cleaning, merging, and reshaping datasets, which streamline exploratory data analysis. Jupyter notebooks enhance this by offering an interactive environment where code, visualizations, and narrative text can be combined, making it ideal for iterative data science tasks and collaborative research. Together, these tools enable efficient statistical analysis workflows, such as loading datasets, performing aggregations and correlations, and generating insights through plots, without requiring low-level programming.
For machine learning applications within scientific and data contexts, Python libraries provide accessible implementations of algorithms and frameworks. Scikit-learn offers a suite of tools for classical machine learning tasks, including classification, regression, clustering, and dimensionality reduction, built on NumPy and SciPy for seamless integration with scientific computing pipelines. TensorFlow and PyTorch enable deep learning models, with TensorFlow supporting scalable production deployments and PyTorch favoring dynamic computation graphs for research-oriented neural network development in areas like image analysis and predictive modeling. Python has emerged as the dominant language for artificial intelligence development, including advanced techniques such as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), due to its extensive ecosystem and community support. Python supports RAG, which combines retrieval from external knowledge sources with generative models to enhance response accuracy and reduce hallucinations, using major frameworks such as LangChain, LlamaIndex, and Haystack that provide abstractions for building RAG pipelines. Complementing these are libraries like sentence-transformers for generating text embeddings, the openai package for interfacing with large language models, and clients for vector databases such as Chroma, Pinecone, and Qdrant, enabling comprehensive RAG implementations.
Python's adoption in scientific computing and data science has surged since the 2010s, driven by its role in AI advancements and integration into academic and research institutions. In academia, organizations like NASA utilize Python for machine learning in high-performance computing environments, supporting over 250 users in scientific research since 2020 through AI/ML software stacks. In genomics, Python handles big data challenges with tools for processing high-throughput omics data, facilitating AI-based analyses in biology. These tools extend to broader healthcare applications, including the analysis of patient records, clinical trial data, and epidemiological studies, where Python enables efficient processing and insight generation from medical information. This growth aligns with the exponential increase in AI model training compute since 2010, at a rate of 4.4x per year, underscoring Python's centrality in accelerating discoveries across these fields.

Web Development and Automation

Python has become a prominent choice for web development due to its robust frameworks that facilitate the creation of scalable applications. Django, a full-stack framework, provides an all-in-one solution with built-in features for authentication, administration, and ORM, making it ideal for rapid development of complex web applications. Flask, on the other hand, is a lightweight microframework suited for smaller projects or microservices, offering flexibility with minimal boilerplate code while allowing developers to integrate extensions as needed. For building high-performance APIs, FastAPI leverages Python type hints for automatic documentation and validation, enabling fast development of modern, asynchronous web services.
In automation, Python excels in scripting repetitive tasks and interacting with web elements. Selenium is widely used for automated browser testing and web scraping, simulating user interactions across different browsers to ensure application reliability. Scrapy serves as a powerful framework for large-scale web crawling, handling data extraction from websites efficiently through its built-in support for pipelines and middleware. Additionally, standard library modules like os for file and directory operations and subprocess for executing external commands enable straightforward automation scripts, such as batch processing or system administration tasks.
Python's clean and readable syntax, which resembles plain English and relies on indentation rather than complex symbols, makes it particularly accessible to non-programmers, including doctors and other healthcare professionals. This beginner-friendly design allows users without prior coding experience to quickly learn and apply Python for practical tasks. It enables scripting for tasks such as automating repetitive work like handling spreadsheets of patient data, processing medical reports and files, generating summaries from health records, and conducting basic analysis of patient information. Libraries like pandas support efficient manipulation of structured medical datasets, while Jupyter notebooks provide an interactive environment suitable for exploratory analysis in clinical contexts. The book "Automate the Boring Stuff with Python" by Al Sweigart is frequently recommended as an entry point for such users, offering practical automation examples that require no prior knowledge. Python's versatility also extends to integrating with robotic process automation (RPA) platforms like UiPath for enterprise workflows, data analysis, and machine learning applications. This versatility contributes to strong demand for Python skills in test automation, DevOps, backend development, and data science within business contexts.
On the server side, Python integrates seamlessly with databases via tools like SQLAlchemy, an ORM that abstracts SQL operations and supports multiple database backends, simplifying data persistence in web applications. Deployment is facilitated by platforms such as Heroku, which offers easy scaling for Python apps with managed PostgreSQL add-ons, and AWS, providing comprehensive cloud services like Elastic Beanstalk for hosting Flask or Django projects.
Python's popularity in web development is evident in its adoption by major companies; for instance, Instagram relies on Django for its backend to handle millions of users, while Spotify uses Python for backend services and data processing to support its streaming platform. In DevOps, Python powers automation with tools like Ansible, an agentless configuration management system written in Python, streamlining infrastructure as code practices across deployments.
A key trend in Python web development is the rise of asynchronous programming with asyncio, introduced in Python 3.5, which enables non-blocking I/O operations for handling concurrent requests efficiently in frameworks like FastAPI. This has led to improved performance in high-traffic web applications, aligning with the growing demand for scalable, real-time services.

Other Domains

Python has found significant applications in game development, particularly through libraries like Pygame, which facilitates the creation of 2D games and multimedia programs. Pygame provides tools for handling graphics, sound, and user input, making it accessible for developers to build interactive experiences. Notably, it has been used in the development of major titles such as Civilization IV, where Python scripts powered modding and gameplay elements, demonstrating its utility in both indie and commercial game projects.
In desktop application development, Python supports graphical user interfaces (GUIs) via the standard library's Tkinter module, which enables the creation of cross-platform windows, buttons, and menus with minimal code. For more advanced needs, frameworks like Kivy offer multi-touch support and deployment to mobile and desktop environments, allowing developers to build responsive applications such as productivity tools and media players. These tools leverage Python's simplicity to accelerate prototyping and deployment of standalone software.
For embedded systems and Internet of Things (IoT) applications, MicroPythonan optimized implementation of Python 3runs on microcontrollers, enabling lightweight scripting for resource-constrained devices. It is widely used on platforms like the Raspberry Pi Pico for projects involving sensors, automation, and connectivity, such as smart home devices and environmental monitoring systems. This allows rapid development of firmware without the need for lower-level languages like C.
In the finance sector, Python integrates with libraries like QuantLib to support quantitative analysis, risk management, and algorithmic trading, providing tools for pricing derivatives and simulating financial models. Additionally, Python's readability makes it a staple in education, where it is employed in introductory programming courses and tools like IDLE or Jupyter notebooks to teach concepts to beginners. Emerging applications include blockchain development with Web3.py, which simplifies interactions with Ethereum and other networks for building decentralized applications, and multimedia processing via Pillow, a fork of the Python Imaging Library that handles image manipulation, format conversion, and computer vision tasks in creative software.

Community and Development

Python Software Foundation

The Python Software Foundation (PSF) was established in 2001 as a non-profit corporation in the state of Delaware, USA, with the mission to promote, protect, and advance the Python programming language while supporting the growth of the international Python community. This founding aimed to provide a formal organizational structure for owning Python trademarks and fostering sustainable development of the language beyond its initial creation by Guido van Rossum.
The PSF's governance structure includes a board of directors elected by its members, who oversee strategic decisions and meet monthly via IRC, along with officers appointed by the board to handle day-to-day operations. Membership is open to individuals who have made significant contributions to Python and to sponsoring companies invested in the language, granting voting rights to both based on their stewardship potential; members convene annually at the North American PyCon conference. A key component is the Fellows program, which recognizes and nominates members for their extraordinary efforts and impact on Python, the community, and the broader ecosystem, serving as a way to honor major contributors. Funding for the PSF primarily comes from individual donations, sponsor fees, conference registrations like PyCon, and participation in programs such as Google Summer of Code, with its 501(c)(3) status enabling tax-deductible contributions in the US.
Among the PSF's core activities is the management of Python trademarks, including the registered "Python" mark in the US, enforced to prevent confusion while allowing broad nominative use under open-source principles. It also provides legal support for Python releases by managing licensing under a stack of open-source licenses and securing contribution agreements to ensure the validity of newer code additions. Diversity initiatives are supported through targeted grants and programs, such as travel funding for underrepresented groups at events like PyCon US, including contributions from organizations like PyLadies.
Key figures in the PSF's history include Guido van Rossum, Python's creator, who served as Benevolent Dictator for Life (BDFL) until stepping down in 2018, at which point governance for Python development shifted to a steering council; he held the role of PSF President from 2002 to 2023 and retained influence through board involvement thereafter. Current leadership features a diverse board for the 2025-2026 term, including President/Chair Jannis Leidel and Executive Director Deb Nicholson, alongside active committees for finance, executive oversight, and PyCon US.
The PSF's impact lies in ensuring the long-term sustainability of Python through financial reserves and community support, with 2023 assets reaching $5.5 million and grants totaling $697,000 awarded to various projects, reflecting an annual budget exceeding $1 million dedicated to ecosystem growth. This funding model has enabled the PSF to underwrite major conferences like PyCon US, fostering global participation.

Conferences and Standards

The Python community organizes several major conferences to foster collaboration, knowledge sharing, and development. PyCon US, the flagship event, has been held annually since 2003, starting in Washington, D.C., and typically features talks, tutorials, and coding sprints where attendees contribute directly to Python projects. EuroPython, established as Europe's largest Python conference, occurs yearly and includes a mix of presentations, workshops, and networking opportunities, with the 2025 edition held in Prague, Czech Republic; future venues are selected through a call for host proposals by the EuroPython Society. In addition, numerous regional conferences and meetups, such as PyCon Italia or PyCon Africa, provide localized events with similar formats, promoting accessibility across continents.
A key aspect of Python's standards and evolution is the Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs) process, which serves as the formal mechanism for proposing, discussing, and implementing changes to the language and its processes. PEPs can be authored by any community member and are reviewed by core developers, with accepted proposals guiding feature additions or modifications; for instance, PEP 8 outlines the style guide for Python code, emphasizing readability through conventions like indentation and naming. This open process ensures community-driven improvements while maintaining coherence.
Standards in Python are closely tied to the Python Software Foundation (PSF), which oversees deprecation policies to phase out obsolete features gracefully, often through PEPs that specify timelines and migration paths. Community contributions to CPython, the reference implementation, primarily occur via GitHub, where developers submit pull requests for code changes. The project's bug tracker, hosted on GitHub Issues, allows users to report and triage defects, facilitating collaborative maintenance.
In recent developments, Python's governance shifted post-2018 toward a consensus-based model following Guido van Rossum's retirement as benevolent dictator for life, adopting a steering council structure as defined in PEP 8016 to guide decisions democratically. This change, formalized through community voting under PEP 8001, emphasizes collective input while PSF provides oversight for broader standards.

Learning Resources

Beginner Tutorials and Documentation

The official Python tutorial, available through the Python Software Foundation's documentation at python.org, serves as a primary resource for beginners, introducing fundamental concepts such as installation, basic syntax, data structures, and simple script creation in an informal yet structured manner. This tutorial is integrated into the Python 3.14 documentation (latest version 3.14.3, released February 3, 2026), which incorporates features from the initial release of Python 3.14 (October 7, 2025), including improved error messages and performance enhancements, making it an up-to-date starting point for new learners. It includes interactive shell examples that allow users to experiment with code directly in the Python REPL environment, covering topics from variables and control flow to modules and file handling.
For free online tutorials, Codecademy offers a beginner-friendly Python 3 course that focuses on syntax essentials like indentation, print statements, variables, and user input through interactive lessons and examples. Similarly, freeCodeCamp provides a comprehensive, certification-eligible Python course for absolute beginners, teaching fundamentals such as lists, conditionals, strings, functions, and classes via video tutorials and hands-on projects, with no prior programming experience required. Interactive platforms like DataCamp offer hands-on Python courses with in-browser coding exercises, particularly suited for beginners interested in data analysis and science. In 2025, multiple beginner-friendly tutorials specifically focused on Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) in Python were published, covering core conceptsclasses (blueprints), objects (instances), encapsulation (data hiding), inheritance (code reuse), polymorphism (same method different behaviors), and abstraction (hiding complexity)which remain unchanged in recent Python versions. These tutorials provide code examples and explore real-world applications to help learners understand and apply OOP principles effectively. One example is the freeCodeCamp guide "Master Object Oriented Programming in Python," which offers detailed explanations and practical examples. These resources complement the official docs by emphasizing practical, guided exercises in a web-based format.
Recommended books for practical introductions include "Automate the Boring Stuff with Python" (3rd edition, 2023), which teaches Python through real-world automation tasks like file manipulation and web scraping, ideal for beginners seeking immediate applicability without deep theory. Another strong option is "Python Crash Course" (3rd edition, 2023), a hands-on guide that builds skills via projects such as games and data visualizations, progressing from basics to intermediate problem-solving.
Installation guides are essential for beginners, with the official Python downloads page providing platform-specific instructions for Windows, macOS, and Linux, including executable installers and package manager commands to set up the latest Python 3.14.3. macOS users of the official python.org installer should be aware of a common issue that can occur after uninstalling or upgrading Python versions (for example, from 3.10): broken symlinks may remain in /usr/local/bin/, such as python3 pointing to a non-existent path like /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.10/bin/python3. This happens because the installer creates symlinks that persist even after the corresponding framework directory is removed, often due to incomplete cleanup of previous installations. To resolve, check the symlink with which python3, remove broken links using sudo rm /usr/local/bin/python3 (and similarly for pip3 or other affected tools if broken), and optionally remove remnants with sudo rm -rf /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.10. Then, reinstall cleanly using the latest official python.org installer or, preferably, Homebrew (brew install python), which often avoids such symlink problems by managing installations and links more robustly.
A popular alternative for macOS and Linux users is Homebrew, a package manager that provides version-specific Python installations. As of February 2026, Python 3.13 is available and actively maintained in Homebrew via the formula. The current stable version is 3.13.12 (released February 3, 2026, as a maintenance release with bug fixes). Homebrew updated the bottle for 3.13.12_1 on February 6, 2026. The formula is not deprecated, supports bottles on recent macOS versions (Tahoe, Sequoia, Sonoma) and Linux platforms, and installs via brew install . Python 3.14 is the latest feature release.
For users on Ubuntu, Python can be installed using the apt package manager, with the process varying by release. On Ubuntu 24.04 (Noble Numbat), Python 3.12 is available in the official repositories and can be installed with:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install python3.12
On older versions (e.g., Ubuntu 22.04), the Deadsnakes PPA is required:
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa
sudo apt update
sudo apt install python3.12
Availability depends on the Ubuntu release; for Ubuntu 24.04, no PPA is needed as it is in the main repositories. The Deadsnakes PPA provides Python 3.12 for older versions and may support others, but users should check compatibility. There are no guarantees for security updates with the PPA.
For those interested in data science, Anaconda offers a beginner-oriented distribution that includes hundreds of packages and tools like Anaconda Navigator, simplifying setup through a graphical installer and environment management tools. These guides ensure a smooth start, often including verification steps to confirm successful installation across operating systems.
Python has minimal hardware requirements, with no official minimum specifications published for CPU, RAM, or disk space; typical installations require a modern CPU, approximately 200 MB of disk space, and low RAM usage, as it is lightweight software that runs on most computers meeting the OS criteria. The primary constraints are the supported OS versions for Python 3.14.3 (released February 3, 2026): Windows requires Windows 10 or newer (per PEP 11; Windows 8.1 and older not supported, use older Python versions for legacy OS); macOS official installers support macOS 10.15 (Catalina) or newer (universal2 binary for Intel and Apple Silicon); Linux/Unix has no official binaries, requiring build from source (needs C compiler and development headers) or use of distribution package managers (e.g., apt, yum, Homebrew); supported on most modern distributions. 64-bit architectures are recommended, with 32-bit and ARM64 support available on Windows.

Online Courses and Books

In 2026, the best way for beginners to learn Python is through a structured, hands-on course combined with practical projects and consistent practice. Top recommendations include:

"100 Days of Code: The Complete Python Pro Bootcamp" by Angela Yu on Udemy a comprehensive, project-based course covering basics to advanced topics with daily challenges, including automation, web development, data science, and machine learning.

"Python for Everybody" Specialization on Coursera (University of Michigan) beginner-friendly with clear explanations, focusing on fundamentals, data handling, and real-world applications.

Interactive platforms like DataCamp provide hands-on, interactive lessons and projects, especially for data-oriented learning. Official Python tutorials and full YouTube courses also serve as strong free resources. Beginners should start with basics (variables, loops, functions), build small projects (e.g., games, automation scripts), practice daily, use AI tools for help, and build a portfolio.
In recent discussions on the r/learnpython subreddit, commonly recommended resources for beginners include Harvard's CS50 Introduction to Programming with Python (free), the University of Helsinki's Python Programming MOOC (free, updated in 2025 with Discord support), and the book Python Crash Course by Eric Matthes. Paid options such as Angela Yu's 100 Days of Code: The Complete Python Pro Bootcamp on Udemy are also frequently praised, especially for their structured project-based learning. These resources are noted for effectively teaching Python fundamentals while remaining relevant and not outdated.
One prominent online course for Python learners is the "Python for Everybody" specialization offered by the University of Michigan on Coursera, which covers fundamental programming concepts, data structures, web data access, and databases through five courses totaling around 76 hours. This specialization is designed for beginners but builds practical applications, making it suitable for those progressing from introductory materials.
The MIT Introduction to Computer Science and Programming Using Python, available on edX, provides an introductory to intermediate-level exploration of computational thinking and problem-solving with Python 3.5, including topics like algorithms, data structures, and testing, over approximately 9 weeks of self-paced study. Similarly, Udacity offers nanodegree programs such as the Intermediate Python Nanodegree, which focuses on advanced features like decorators, generators, and concurrent programming to streamline application functionality, and the AI Programming with Python Nanodegree, targeting intelligent agent development with neural networks.
For AI-focused learning, the Practical Deep Learning for Coders course from fast.ai, launched in 2022, teaches intermediate to expert users how to apply deep learning and machine learning to real-world problems using Python, with hands-on notebooks and exercises assuming some prior coding experience. This course represents an update in resources, incorporating modern AI techniques not fully covered in earlier materials.
Key books for advancing from intermediate to expert levels include "Fluent Python" by Luciano Ramalho (2nd edition, O'Reilly, 2022), which delves into core language features, libraries, and idiomatic code for making programs shorter, faster, and more readable. "Effective Python" by Brett Slatkin (3rd edition, 2024) offers 125 specific best practices, tips, and shortcuts with code examples to leverage Python's strengths and avoid pitfalls. Additionally, "Learning Python" by Mark Lutz (6th edition, O'Reilly, 2025) provides comprehensive coverage of efficient, high-quality code writing based on the author's training course, suitable for those seeking in-depth reference material.
The PCAP Certified Associate in Python Programming certification from the Python Institute validates intermediate skills through a 40-question, multiple-choice exam lasting 65 minutes, covering topics like basic concepts, data types, control and evaluations, and functions with a passing score of 70%, available online via Pearson VUE for around USD 295. This certification includes a detailed syllabus divided into sections weighted by importance, such as 12% on modules and packages, 34% on object-oriented programming, and others as per the official outline.

Practice Methods and Communities

Practicing Python programming involves a variety of hands-on tools and methods designed to build problem-solving skills and practical experience. Consistent daily practice, building small projects, using AI tools for assistance, and creating a portfolio are key to effective learning. Platforms like HackerRank offer coding challenges, including a dedicated section for Project Euler problems that combine mathematical insights with programming, helping users tackle over 800 problems to enhance algorithmic thinking. Similarly, LeetCode provides a wide array of Python-specific coding exercises focused on data structures and algorithms, often used by developers to prepare for technical interviews and improve efficiency in real-world applications. Project Euler, in particular, emphasizes mathematical/computer programming challenges that require more than basic coding, fostering deeper computational understanding through problems solvable in Python.
Beyond structured challenges, effective practice methods include building personal projects, such as simple games, automation scripts, or web scrapers, which allow learners to apply Python libraries like Requests and Beautiful Soup to extract and process data from websites. These projects simulate real-world tasks, starting from simple HTML parsing to more advanced techniques like handling dynamic content, and can be hosted on GitHub for version control and collaboration to build a portfolio. Many learners use AI-powered tools, such as large language models, for real-time code suggestions, explanations, and debugging. Contributing to open-source repositories on GitHub is another key method, where beginners can start with issues labeled as "good first issue" in Python projects, gaining experience in code review, pull requests, and community-driven development. Such contributions not only reinforce coding skills but also expose practitioners to diverse codebases and best practices in collaborative environments.
Python communities play a crucial role in supporting practice through peer interaction and knowledge sharing. Stack Overflow serves as a primary Q&A platform where users post Python-related queries and receive detailed, voted solutions from experienced developers, making it an essential resource for troubleshooting during practice sessions. Reddit's r/learnpython subreddit provides a forum for beginners to discuss coding challenges, share project ideas, and seek advice in a supportive, community-moderated space. Discord servers, such as the official Python Discord, offer real-time chat channels for live coding help, study groups, and casual discussions, enabling immediate feedback on practice exercises.
Mentorship programs enhance inclusivity within these communities, particularly for underrepresented groups. PyLadies is an international mentorship organization focused on empowering women to become active participants and leaders in the Python open-source community through workshops, events, and networking opportunities. It provides tailored guidance for women learning Python, including remote meetups that promote skill-building in a welcoming environment. Women Who Code complements this by offering broader tech mentorship that connects women with mentors for project-based learning and career advice.
The COVID-19 pandemic, starting in 2020, accelerated the growth of remote learning communities for Python, shifting focus toward virtual platforms to maintain continuity in education and practice. This period saw increased adoption of online tools and blended approaches, with communities like PyLadies expanding remote chapters to support global participation amid lockdowns. Post-2020, Discord and Reddit forums reported higher engagement in remote study groups, addressing gaps in hands-on practice by facilitating virtual hackathons and collaborative coding sessions. These shifts have made Python practice more accessible, though challenges like digital divides persist in sustaining long-term remote community involvement.

Turkish-Language Resources

For learners preferring Turkish-language materials, several popular and up-to-date resources are available in 2025-2026:

BTK Akademi: Free, official, and structured Python courses covering from beginner levels to data science topics. It is one of the most popular starting resources for Turkish learners.

Patika.dev: Free interactive learning paths for Python and data science, emphasizing practical, hands-on exercises.

Sadk Turan YouTube Channel: A comprehensive free video series covering Python from beginner to advanced levels, widely regarded as one of the most popular Turkish resources.

Official Python Documentation in Turkish: The official Python tutorial translated into Turkish, current for Python 3.12 and later versions.

Udemy Turkish Courses: Popular courses by instructors such as Sadk Turan and Mustafa Murat Cokun, frequently available at discounted prices during sales.

Beginners are recommended to start with BTK Akademi or Patika.dev and then reinforce their learning with Sadk Turans video series.

Criticisms and Limitations

Performance and Speed

Python's performance is often characterized by its interpreted nature, which prioritizes developer productivity over raw execution speed, making it slower than compiled languages like C++ for compute-intensive tasks such as tight loops. In benchmarks, Python code executing simple loops can be orders of magnitude slower than equivalent C++ implementations due to the overhead of dynamic typing and bytecode interpretation. However, alternative implementations like PyPy, which employs just-in-time (JIT) compilation, can deliver significant speedupsoften several times faster than standard CPython for certain pure Python workloadsby optimizing hot code paths at runtime.
A key limitation affecting Python's performance in multi-threaded scenarios in the standard CPython implementation is the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL), which serializes access to the Python interpreter, preventing true parallel execution of CPU-bound threads and effectively limiting multi-threading to I/O-bound tasks. Starting with Python 3.13, experimental free-threaded builds without the GIL are available, with improvements in Python 3.14. This GIL-induced bottleneck means that for CPU-intensive operations in standard builds, developers are encouraged to use multiprocessing instead, which spawns separate processes to bypass the lock and achieve parallelism, albeit at the cost of higher memory usage and inter-process communication overhead. Compared to languages like Java, which supports efficient multi-threading without a similar lock, or Ruby, which also faces threading limitations but offers different concurrency models, Python trades some runtime speed for its emphasis on simplicity and rapid development, where prototyping in Python can be 3-5 times faster than in Java.
To mitigate performance issues, Python provides several optimization strategies, starting with profiling tools like cProfile, a deterministic profiler that measures function call times and helps identify bottlenecks in long-running programs with low overhead. For critical sections, developers can write C extensions using the Python/C API, which compile to native machine code and integrate seamlessly, offering speeds comparable to pure C while retaining Python's ecosystem. Additionally, libraries like Numba enable just-in-time compilation of numerical Python code to LLVM-optimized machine code, providing near-C speeds for array operations and loops without requiring C knowledge.
Recent versions of CPython, through the Faster CPython project, have addressed longstanding performance concerns. For example, as of Python 3.11 (released in 2022), it delivered 10-60% faster execution than Python 3.10 across a standard benchmark suite, thanks to optimizations in bytecode interpretation, frame handling, and exception management, averaging a 1.25x speedup. Subsequent releases continued these efforts: Python 3.12 (2023) included further optimizations, Python 3.13 (2024) introduced an experimental JIT compiler and free-threaded mode, and Python 3.14 (2025) enhanced free-threading and provided additional speed improvements of around 27% over 3.13 in some benchmarks. These improvements enhance Python's viability for performance-sensitive applications while maintaining its core design principles.

Design Choices and Trade-offs

Python's dynamic typing system, where variable types are determined at runtime rather than compile time, offers flexibility in coding but introduces significant pitfalls compared to statically typed languages. This approach allows developers to write code without explicit type declarations, promoting rapid prototyping and reducing boilerplate, but it often leads to runtime errors that would be caught earlier in static languages like Java or C++. For instance, a type mismatch, such as adding a string to an integer, may only surface during execution, potentially causing unexpected failures in production environments.
The Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) represents a core design choice in Python aimed at simplifying memory management and ensuring thread safety through reference counting, but it severely limits true parallelism in multi-threaded applications. By allowing only one thread to execute Python bytecode at a time, the GIL prevents efficient utilization of multiple CPU cores for CPU-bound tasks, forcing developers to rely on multiprocessing or external libraries for parallelism, which adds complexity. This trade-off prioritizes implementation simplicity and compatibility with C extensions over high-performance concurrent execution, a decision rooted in Python's early design philosophy.
Python's use of indentation to define code blocks, rather than delimiters like braces, enhances readability by visually enforcing structure and reducing visual clutter, aligning with the language's goal of making code as readable as English. However, this design introduces dependencies on text editors and tools that must correctly handle indentation levels, leading to issues like errors from inconsistent spacing or tabs versus spaces, which can complicate code pasting, merging, or collaboration in environments without proper support. The Python Enhancement Proposal 8 (PEP 8) recommends spaces for indentation to mitigate some of these problems, but the reliance on whitespace remains a point of friction for developers accustomed to delimiter-based languages.
The transition from Python 2 to Python 3 created significant version fragmentation, delaying widespread adoption due to backward incompatibilities in syntax, standard library changes, and print statements, which required substantial code rewrites for migration. Released in 2008, Python 3 aimed to address long-standing design flaws but faced slow uptake because many libraries and legacy systems remained tied to Python 2, leading to a bifurcated ecosystem that fragmented the community and hindered productivity until Python 2's end-of-life in 2020. This split ultimately resolved with near-universal adoption of Python 3, but it underscored the risks of breaking changes in major version updates.
Modern critiques of Python highlight under-discussed gaps, such as its limitations in mobile development, where the language lacks native support and robust frameworks, making it less suitable for iOS or Android apps compared to specialized languages like Swift or Kotlin. Additionally, ecosystem bloat has emerged as a concern, with the proliferation of packages via PyPI leading to dependency hell, security vulnerabilities from unmaintained libraries, and challenges in managing large-scale projects due to version conflicts and overhead. These issues reflect trade-offs in Python's open-source, community-driven model, which fosters innovation but can overwhelm developers with choice and maintenance burdens.

References

General Python FAQ Python 3.14.2 documentation

What is Python? Executive Summary

Brief Bio - Guido van Rossum

History of Python releases - Python Development (Victor's notes)

About Python

History and License Python 3.14.2 documentation

Executive Summary: The Python Software Foundation

Python Release Python 3.12.0

25 Years of Python at CWI - CWI Amsterdam

2018 Museum Fellow Guido van Rossum, Python Creator ...

Personal History - part 1, CWI - The History of Python

Introduction to Python Programming Overview - History

Releases - Python.org

Python 2.0

Python 2.7.0 Release

Python 3.0 Release

Sunsetting Python 2 | Python.org

What's New In Python 3.5 Python 3.14.2 documentation

What's New In Python 3.12 Python 3.14.2 documentation

Status of Python versions - Python Developer's Guide

Python Logos - PSF Wiki

The Python Logo | Python Software Foundation

What are the colors associated to python? - Alphonsio

What are some of the best examples of references to Monty Python ...

PEP 20 The Zen of Python

3. An Informal Introduction to Python Python 3.14.2 documentation

PEP 8 Style Guide for Python Code

10. Brief Tour of the Standard Library Python 3.14.2 documentation

PEP 206 Python Advanced Library

https://docs.python.org/3/_sources/faq/general.rst.txt

What's New in Python 2.2 Python 3.14.2 documentation

gc Garbage Collector interface Python 3.14.2 documentation

The Making of Python - Artima

Early Language Design and Development - The History of Python

Foreword for "Programming Python" (1st ed.)

Python reference manual - Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica

Comparing Python to Other Languages

Python's Design Philosophy

Built-in Types Python 3.14.2 documentation

Data Types Python 3.14.2 documentation

5. Data Structures Python 3.14.2 documentation

Built-in Functions Python 3.14.2 documentation

4. More Control Flow Tools Python 3.14.2 documentation

8. Errors and Exceptions Python 3.14.2 documentation

3. Data model Python 3.14.2 documentation

__main__ Top-level code environment Python 3.14 ...

What Does if __name__ == "__main__" Do in Python?

5. The import system Python 3.14.2 documentation

Python import: Advanced Techniques and Tips

Packaging namespace packages - Python Packaging User Guide

Packaging Python Projects

What's a Python Namespace Package, and What's It For?

How to Fix a Circular Import in Python - Rollbar

Packaging and distributing projects - Python Packaging User Guide

Building and Distributing Packages with Setuptools

9. Classes Python 3.14.2 documentation

3. Data model Python 3.14.2 documentation

Glossary Python 3.14.2 documentation

The Python Standard Library Python 3.14.2 documentation

os Miscellaneous operating system interfaces Python 3.14.2 ...

sys System-specific parameters and functions Python 3.14.2 ...

io Core tools for working with streams ... - Python documentation

json JSON encoder and decoder Python 3.14.2 documentation

csv CSV File Reading and Writing Python 3.14.2 documentation

datetime Basic date and time types Python 3.14.2 documentation

urllib URL handling modules Python 3.14.2 documentation

socket Low-level networking interface Python 3.14.2 ...

math Mathematical functions Python 3.14.2 documentation

random Generate pseudo-random numbers Python 3.14.2 ...

collections Container datatypes Python 3.14.2 documentation

threading Thread-based parallelism Python 3.14.2 ...

multiprocessing Process-based parallelism Python 3.14.2 ...

Tool recommendations - Python Packaging User Guide

venv Creation of virtual environments ... - Python documentation

Install packages in a virtual environment using pip and venv

Python Packaging, One Year Later: A Look Back at 2023 in Python ...

Python Virtual Environments: A Primer

python/cpython: The Python programming language - GitHub

CPython's internals - Python Developer's Guide

1. Extending Python with C or C++ Python 3.14.2 documentation

virtual machine (VM) | Python Glossary

Python Garbage Collection: Key Concepts and Mechanisms

What Is the Python Global Interpreter Lock (GIL)? - Real Python

Python/C API Reference Manual Python 3.14.2 documentation

Python Source Releases

Download Python - Python.org

What's New In Python 3.11 Python 3.14.2 documentation

Python Release Python 3.11.6

Difference between various Implementations of Python

Jython: Home

Jython 3 Roadmap

IronPython.net /

IronPython.net / Download

PyPy

Frequently Asked Questions - PyPy documentation

Download and Install - PyPy

MicroPython - Python for microcontrollers

Cython: C-Extensions for Python

Basic Tutorial Cython 3.3.0a0 documentation

Scientific Python Lectures

SciPy

10 minutes to pandas pandas 2.3.3 documentation

Project Jupyter | Home

Python Data Science Handbook

scikit-learn: machine learning in Python scikit-learn 1.8.0 ...

Machine Learning in Python: Main developments and ... - NASA ADS

Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning in HPC Environments

'Big data', Hadoop and cloud computing in genomics - ScienceDirect

Data on AI Models | Epoch AI

Which Is the Best Python Web Framework: Django, Flask, or FastAPI?

Welcome to Flask Flask Documentation (3.1.x)

FastAPI

How to use Scrapy with Selenium for Advanced Web Scraping

Python Scrapy VS Python Selenium Compared - ScrapeOps

The subprocess Module: Wrapping Programs With Python

Step-by-Step Deployment of a Free PostgreSQL Database and Data ...

How to Deploy a Python Flask app with Heroku | AppSignal Blog

Top 14 Global Companies Using Python in 2023 | Vivasoft Ltd

Top 30 Companies That Use Python for Success and Profit - JayDevs

asyncio Asynchronous I/O Python 3.14.2 documentation

Python Async Programming: The Complete Guide - DataCamp

January 2009 - The History of Python

PSF Fellow Membership | Python Software Foundation

Python Software Foundation

PSF Officers & Board Members | Python Software Foundation

The PSF has paused our Grants Program

Welcome to PyCon US 2023

EuroPython 2025 | July 14th-20th 2025 | Prague, Czech Republic ...

Our Events | Python.org

PEP 0 Index of Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs) | peps ...

Issue tracker - Python Developer's Guide

PEP 8001 Python Governance Voting Process

The Python Tutorial Python 3.14.2 documentation

Python 3.12 documentation DevDocs

Learn Python 3 - Codecademy

Python Certification | freeCodeCamp.org

Automate the Boring Stuff with Python

Python Crash Course, 3rd Edition | No Starch Press

Getting started with Anaconda

Python for Everybody Specialization - Coursera

Programming for Everybody (Getting Started with Python) - Coursera

Introduction to Computer Science and Programming Using Python.

Learn Intermediate Python Online - Udacity

AI Programming with Python - Udacity

Practical Deep Learning for Coders - Fast.ai

fast.aiMaking neural nets uncool again fast.ai

Fluent Python, 2nd Edition - O'Reilly

Effective Python The Book: Third Edition

Learning Python, 6th Edition - O'Reilly

PCAP Certified Associate Python Programmer

PCAP-31-0x Exam Syllabus - Python Institute

Project Euler - HackerRank

Project Euler: About

Project Euler Problems 1 to 100 - Problem 1: Multiples of 3 and 5

oxylabs/Python-Web-Scraping-Tutorial - GitHub

Intro to Web Scraping: Build Your First Scraper in 5 Minutes - Medium

15 Python Web Scraping Projects: From Beginner to Advanced

How To Scrape GitHub Repositories in Python - Bright Data

Best Python Programmers' Communities Online - CodeEasy

Python Education - Reddit

How to Get Help from the Python and VS Code Communities

PyLadies Remote

'PyLadies' Mentorship Group Helps Women Python Developers

PyLadies | Women in Tech Network

 A blended learning approach for teaching python programming ...

Students and instructors reflections on the impact of COVID-19 on ...

Emerging from the pandemic: instructor reflections and students ...

Python vs JAVA vs PHP vs PERL vs Ruby vs JavaScript vs C++ vs TCL

Which programming language is fastest? (Benchmarks Game)

Performance | PyPy

When Python can't thread: a deep-dive into the GIL's impact

Is programming in Python faster than in C, C++ or Java? 

The Python Profilers Python 3.14.2 documentation

How to Optimize Python Code for Speed: Profiling, Cython, Numba ...

Python Performance Optimization: A Practical, Detailed Guide

What's New in Python 3.11 - Performance Improvements

Why Python is called Dynamically Typed? - GeeksforGeeks

Understanding Python's Global Interpreter Lock - Leapcell

Understand Python Global Interpreter Lock in Multithreading

What are the drawbacks of using indentation for code blocks?

Why is the Migration to Python 3 Taking So Long? - Stack Overflow

Python 2->3 transition was horrifically bad - LWN.net

The Pros and Cons of Python Programming Language - Redwerk

Pros and Cons of Python in 2026 | Advantages and Disadvantages

Top 10 Limitations of Python Every Developer Should Know

What's New In Python 3.10

PEP 604 Allow writing union types as X | Y

PEP 696 TypeVar defaults

PEP 705 ReadOnly for TypedDict

PEP 742 TypeIs

Python Release Python 3.6.0

End-of-life (EOL) versions usage

How Python Transforms Business Process Automation for Success

Integrating Python in UiPath: Unlocking Advanced Automation Capabilities

7 Python Career Paths That Are Most In-Demand

LangChain vs LangGraph vs LlamaIndex vs Haystack vs DSPy

src layout vs flat layout - Python Packaging User Guide

Python Modules and Packages An Introduction

BTK Akademi Official Site

Patika.dev

Sadk Turan YouTube Channel

Official Python Documentation (Turkish)

Using Python on Windows - Python Documentation

Using Python on macOS - Python Documentation

Python 3.14.0 Release Notes

Python 3.14.3 Release Notes

Python Release Python 3.14.3

PEP 11 CPython platform support

Master Object Oriented Programming in Python

Homebrew Formulae - 

CS50's Introduction to Programming with Python

Python Programming MOOC 2025

Python Crash Course by Eric Matthes

100 Days of Code: The Complete Python Pro Bootcamp

Best beginners course for learning Python in 2025

TIOBE Index

Landscape of High-Performance Python to Develop Data Science and Machine Learning Applications

Analyzing Kaggle Data Science Survey - Dataquest

DataCamp Python Courses

Using Python on macOS Python 3.14.3 documentation

Deadsnakes PPA

Ubuntu Packages: python3.12 (Noble)

About Python | Python.org

Automate the Boring Stuff with Python

pychaos.io - Python Bytecode Decompiler

pycdc - C++ Python Bytecode Disassembler and Decompiler

decompyle3 - PyPI

SymPy - Python library for symbolic mathematics

PyChrono - Python interface for Project Chrono

QuTiP - Quantum Toolbox in Python

Physics Simulations in Python - A Lab Manual

awesome-scientific-python - Curated list of awesome scientific Python resources

Python in Data Science and AI 2026: The Dominant Language for ML, Research, and Production

Top 10 RAG Frameworks on GitHub (By Stars) January 2026
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion