Python (programming language) Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Python (programming language)
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Python is an interpreted, high-level, general-purpose programming language designed for code readability and simplicity, featuring a dynamic type system and support for multiple programming paradigms including procedural, object-oriented, and functional styles. Created by Dutch programmer Guido van Rossum during the Christmas holidays of 1989 while working at the Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands, Python drew inspiration from languages like ABC and Modula-3 to serve as an extensible scripting tool for system administration, particularly for the Amoeba operating system. Its first public release, version 0.9.0, occurred in February 1991 via a posting to the Usenet newsgroup comp.lang.python.
Python's design philosophy prioritizes clarity, using indentation for code blocks instead of braces, which enhances readability and reduces syntax errors compared to languages like C or Java. It includes an extensive standard libraryoften described as "batteries included"covering areas from file I/O to networking and data processing, alongside dynamic typing that allows variables to hold any object type without explicit declarations. As an interpreted language, Python executes code line-by-line through its interactive shell (using the >>> prompt), making it ideal for rapid prototyping and interactive experimentation. The language is highly extensible, permitting integration with C and C++ modules for performance-critical components, and it runs portably across major platforms including Unix variants, Linux, macOS, and Windows. The current stable version, as of December 2025, is Python 3.14.2, which continues to evolve with improvements in performance, type hinting, and asynchronous programming support.
Widely adopted for its versatility, Python powers applications in web development (e.g., via frameworks like Django and Flask), scientific and numeric computing (with libraries such as NumPy and SciPy), data science, machine learning (using TensorFlow and PyTorch), automation scripting, education, desktop graphical user interfaces, and business software like enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems. Notable users include platforms like YouTube for backend services, Instagram for web infrastructure, and NASA for scientific simulations, underscoring its role in both commercial and research environments. In terms of popularity, Python has consistently ranked as the most used programming language in developer surveys and indices; for instance, it held the top position in the TIOBE Index for October 2025 with a lead of over 15% ahead of second-place C, reflecting its dominance in areas like artificial intelligence and data analysis. This widespread appeal stems from its beginner-friendly syntax and vast ecosystem of third-party packages managed through tools like pip and the Python Package Index (PyPI).

History

Origins and Creation

Python was created by Guido van Rossum, a Dutch programmer, who began its implementation in December 1989 while working at the Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in Amsterdam, Netherlands. Van Rossum developed Python during a holiday break as a personal project, seeking a scripting language that combined the readability and structure of the ABC languageon which he had previously workedwith greater extensibility and performance for practical use. Intended as a successor to ABC, Python aimed to appeal to Unix and C programmers by offering a high-level, interpreted language that was easier to use than traditional shells while maintaining compatibility with Unix tools.
The language drew key influences from several sources to shape its design. ABC provided inspiration for its clean syntax, support for strings, lists, mappings, and control structures, though Python addressed ABC's limitations in speed and extensibility. Elements from Modula-3 contributed to its modular and object-oriented aspects, while C influenced the overall syntax and integration with system-level programming; Unix shell scripting impacted its emphasis on rapid scripting and command-line usability. These influences allowed Python to balance simplicity for beginners with power for experienced developers.
Van Rossum chose the name "Python" as a temporary working title, inspired by the British comedy series Monty Python's Flying Circus, which he enjoyed and felt captured the desired short, unique, and slightly mysterious quality for the language. The first public release, Python 0.9.0, occurred in February 1991 and introduced foundational features including classes with inheritance, functions, exception handling, and core data structures such as lists and dictionaries. This initial version laid the groundwork for Python's evolution into a versatile general-purpose language.

Major Releases and Milestones

Python's first official public release, version 1.0, arrived in January 1994, introducing foundational functional programming tools such as lambda functions, map, filter, and reduce, which enabled more concise data processing operations. This milestone marked the language's transition from internal use at CWI to broader availability, solidifying its core syntax and module system.
In October 2000, Python 2.0 was released on October 16, bringing significant enhancements including list comprehensions for succinct iterable creation and a cycle-detecting garbage collector to manage memory more efficiently, reducing risks of leaks in complex applications. These features improved code readability and performance, contributing to Python's growing adoption in scripting and prototyping.
A pivotal shift occurred with Python 3.0 on December 3, 2008, designed as a major revision that intentionally broke backward compatibility to address long-standing design inconsistencies and enable cleaner evolution. Key changes included transforming print from a statement to a built-in function for greater flexibility and making Unicode the default string type to better support internationalization, though this required significant migration efforts from Python 2 codebases.
Subsequent releases introduced targeted innovations that shaped Python's modern capabilities. Python 2.5, released on September 19, 2006, added the with-statement for context management, simplifying resource handling like file operations by ensuring automatic cleanup even on exceptions. Python 3.5 followed on September 13, 2015, with async and await keywords via PEP 492, facilitating asynchronous programming for I/O-bound tasks without blocking the event loop. In 2021, Python 3.10 debuted on October 4 with structural pattern matching (PEP 634), allowing more expressive and readable data deconstruction similar to switch statements in other languages. Python 3.12, released October 2, 2023, advanced the Faster CPython project with optimizations like a new adaptive interpreter, yielding up to 60% speed gains in certain benchmarks over prior versions. Most recently, Python 3.14 launched on October 7, 2025, implementing deferred evaluation of annotations per PEP 649, which stores them unevaluated to reduce startup and import times by avoiding unnecessary runtime computations during module loading.
Support lifecycles reflect Python's commitment to stability. Python 2.7 reached end-of-life on January 1, 2020, ceasing all updates including security fixes, prompting widespread migration to Python 3. For Python 3.13, released October 7, 2024, bugfix support extends until October 2026, with security updates (source-only) continuing until October 2029.

Design Philosophy

Core Principles

Python's design is guided by a set of core principles that prioritize simplicity, readability, and practicality, as articulated in the "Zen of Python," a collection of 19 aphorisms authored by Tim Peters in 2004. These principles, which channel the vision of Python's creator Guido van Rossum, emphasize that code should be intuitive and maintainable, serving as an "executive summary" for the language's philosophy.
A central tenet is the focus on readability, encapsulated in aphorisms such as "Explicit is better than implicit" and "Readability counts." This encourages developers to write code that is clear and self-explanatory, avoiding hidden behaviors or overly clever constructs that could confuse readers. For instance, Python favors straightforward declarations over magic-like shortcuts, ensuring that the intent of the code is immediately apparent.
Another key principle is the idea that "There should be oneand preferably only oneobvious way to do it," promoting consistency and reducing the cognitive load on programmers by minimizing multiple viable approaches to common tasks. Complementing this is the "batteries included" philosophy, which provides a comprehensive standard library to handle a wide range of functionalities out of the box, thereby minimizing the need for external dependencies and enabling rapid development.
Python's typing system embodies dynamic typing through "duck typing," a concept where the suitability of an object for a particular use is determined by the presence of the required methods and properties rather than its explicit type. This is summarized by the adage: "If it looks like a duck, swims like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it probably is a duck," allowing for flexible, interface-based polymorphism without rigid class hierarchies.
The full text of the Zen of Python, accessible by running import this in a Python interpreter, consists of the following 19 aphorisms:

Beautiful is better than ugly.

Explicit is better than implicit.

Simple is better than complex.

Complex is better than complicated.

Flat is better than nested.

Sparse is better than dense.

Readability counts.

Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.

Although practicality beats purity.

Errors should never pass silently.

Unless explicitly silenced.

In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.

There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.

Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.

Now is better than never.

Although never is often better than right now.

If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.

If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.

Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!

These principles collectively foster a language that is approachable for beginners while powerful for experts, influencing everything from syntax choices to community practices.

Influential Features

One of Python's distinctive features is its interpreted execution model, which enables an interactive mode known as the Read-Eval-Print Loop (REPL). This allows developers to enter commands directly into the interpreter and receive immediate feedback, facilitating rapid prototyping and exploratory programming without the need to compile or run full scripts. The REPL supports immediate evaluation of expressions and execution of statements, making it particularly useful for testing ideas, debugging, and learning the language incrementally.
Python supports multiple programming paradigms, including object-oriented, procedural, and functional styles, providing flexibility for developers to choose approaches suited to their needs. Its object-oriented capabilities are integrated from the core language design, where everything is treated as an object, enabling features like classes, inheritance, and polymorphism alongside simpler procedural code. Functional programming elements, such as first-class functions, lambda expressions, and higher-order functions, further enhance this multi-paradigm support, allowing concise implementations of patterns like map-reduce without rigid adherence to a single style.
The language offers extensive introspection capabilities, permitting runtime inspection and manipulation of code objects, types, and structures. Built-in functions like type() reveal an object's class or type, while dir() lists available attributes and methods, aiding in dynamic analysis and metaprogramming. The inspect module extends these with tools to examine live objects, such as retrieving source code for functions or signatures for callable objects, which supports advanced debugging and framework development.
Python emphasizes cross-platform portability, running consistently across operating systems like Windows, macOS, Linux, and even mobile environments, with the standard library providing abstractions for platform-specific operations. The os module, for instance, offers a unified interface to file systems, processes, and environment variables, minimizing the need for conditional code based on the host platform. This portability is bolstered by the language's extensibility through the C API, which allows integration of C or C++ code as extension modules to access low-level features or optimize performance-critical sections while maintaining compatibility across systems.
Error handling in Python relies on exceptions as a fundamental mechanism, where runtime errors raise exception objects that can be caught and managed to prevent program termination. The try-except construct enables structured handling, allowing code to anticipate and respond to specific error conditions, such as division by zero or file not found, promoting robust and maintainable applications. This approach integrates seamlessly with the language's dynamic nature, supporting custom exceptions and propagation through call stacks for comprehensive error management.

Syntax and Semantics

Indentation Rules

Python employs indentation to delineate the structure of code blocks, replacing traditional delimiters like braces used in many other programming languages. Leading whitespace at the beginning of a logical line determines the indentation level, which the Python lexer processes to generate INDENT and DEDENT tokens that group statements into blocks. This mechanism ensures that code blocks are explicitly defined by their relative indentation, with the initial stack level starting at zero and subsequent levels strictly increasing.
Indentation must remain consistent throughout a program; each block requires a uniform increase in whitespace from its parent, and deviations trigger parsing errors. The Python interpreter recommends using four spaces per indentation level, as outlined in the style guide, to promote uniformity and readability across codebases. Tabs are permitted but treated as equivalent to one to eight spaces under the Unix tab expansion rule, expanding to the nearest multiple of eight spaces; however, mixing tabs and spaces within the same indentation context raises a TabError to enforce consistency. Inconsistent indentation, such as mismatched levels not aligning with the indentation stack, results in an IndentationError, which the lexer or parser detects during compilation.
The design choice to rely on indentation stems from a desire to enhance code clarity and eliminate visual clutter from delimiters. Guido van Rossum, Python's creator, has stated that this approach is "extremely elegant and contributes a lot to the clarity of the average Python program." By mandating indentation for block structure, Python inherently encourages readable formatting, reducing errors from misplaced braces or semicolons common in other languages.
To address indentation issues, developers can utilize automated tools that reformat code according to established guidelines. For instance, autopep8 automatically adjusts indentation to comply with the four-space recommendation, converting tabs to spaces where necessary and fixing inconsistencies without altering program semantics. This tool integrates with editors and build processes to maintain PEP 8 adherence, helping prevent TabError and IndentationError occurrences in collaborative projects.

Control Flow Statements

Python's control flow statements enable programmers to direct the execution of code based on conditions, repetitions, and error handling, forming the backbone of procedural logic in the language. These constructs, which rely on indentation to define code blocks, include conditional branching, iteration mechanisms, loop control keywords, exception management, and pattern matching. They are defined as compound statements in the language reference, allowing for structured and readable program flow.
The if statement provides conditional execution, evaluating a boolean expression to determine whether to run an associated suite of code. It supports an optional series of elif clauses for additional conditions and an else clause that executes if no preceding condition is true. For instance, the following code demonstrates basic usage:
x = 5
if x > 0:
 print("Positive")
elif x == 0:
 print("Zero")
else:
 print("Negative")
This structure ensures only one suite runs, promoting clear decision-making in scripts.
Iteration in Python occurs through for and while loops, each capable of repeating code execution. The for statement iterates over elements of any iterable object, such as lists or ranges, assigning each item to a target variable in sequence. An optional (/page/The_Else) clause executes after the loop completes normally, without interruption by a break. Example:
for i in range(3):
 print(i)
else:
 print("Loop finished")
This prints 0, 1, 2, and "Loop finished". In contrast, the while loop continues as long as its condition evaluates to true, also supporting an (/page/The_Else) clause that runs upon normal termination. For example:
count = 0
while count < 3:
 print(count)
 count += 1
else:
 print("Count reached 3")
These loops facilitate tasks like processing sequences or awaiting conditions, with the (/page/The_Else) providing a way to handle post-iteration logic.
Loop control is managed by three simple statements: break, continue, and pass. The break keyword immediately exits the innermost enclosing for or while loop, useful for early termination based on a condition. continue skips the rest of the current iteration and proceeds to the next, often used to ignore specific cases. pass acts as a null operation, serving as a placeholder in blocks that must contain at least one statement but require no action during development. An example combining these:
for num in range(10):
 if num % 2 == 0:
 continue
 if num > 7:
 break
 print(num)
This outputs odd numbers from 1 to 7. These statements enhance flexibility without altering the core loop syntax.
Exception handling uses the try statement to intercept and manage runtime errors, preventing program crashes. The structure includes a try suite followed by one or more except clauses that catch specific exceptions, an optional else suite that runs only if no exception occurs, and an optional finally suite that always executes for cleanup. Syntax example:
try:
 result = 10 / 0
except ZeroDivisionError:
 print("Division by zero")
else:
 print("No error")
finally:
 print("Cleanup")
This catches the error, skips the else, and performs cleanup. Multiple except blocks can handle different exception types, with a bare except as a last resort. This mechanism supports robust error recovery in applications.
Introduced in Python 3.10, the match statement enables structural pattern matching, allowing a subject expression to be tested against multiple patterns in case blocks. It executes the first matching case's suite, with an optional guard condition, and supports a wildcard _ for default cases. This feature simplifies complex conditional logic, such as parsing data structures. Example:
def describe_point(point):
 match point:
 case (0, 0):
 return "Origin"
 case (x, 0):
 return f"X-axis at {x}"
 case _:
 return "Other point"

print(describe_point((3, 0))) # Outputs: X-axis at 3
The match statement enhances expressiveness for tasks like API response handling or data validation.

Expressions and Operators

In Python, expressions are combinations of values, variables, and operators that evaluate to a single value, forming the basis for computations and decisions within code. Operators are special symbols or keywords that perform operations on these operands, such as arithmetic calculations or logical evaluations. The language supports a variety of operators categorized by function, with well-defined rules for precedence and associativity to resolve ambiguities in mixed expressions.
Arithmetic operators handle numerical computations and include addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (*), true division (/), floor division (//), modulo (%), and exponentiation (**). These operators work on numeric types like integers and floats, automatically promoting operands to a common type (e.g., integers to floats during division). For instance, 10 // 3 yields 3 by truncating toward negative infinity, while 10 % 3 returns the remainder 1. Exponentiation, with higher precedence, computes powers like 2 ** 3 resulting in 8. The @ operator, introduced for matrix multiplication in Python 3.5, applies to compatible types like NumPy arrays but is not a general arithmetic operator.
Comparison operators evaluate relationships between operands, producing boolean results: equality (==), inequality (!=), less than (<), greater than (>), less than or equal (<=), and greater than or equal (>=). Identity (is) and membership (in) operators also fall under comparisons, testing object identity or containment in iterables, respectively. Chained comparisons, such as 1 < x <= 5, are supported and evaluate efficiently without intermediate variables. Logical operators include and, or, and not, which perform short-circuit evaluation: and returns the first falsy operand or the last value, while or returns the first truthy operand or the last. The unary not inverts truth values. Bitwise operators manipulate integer bits: AND (&), OR (|), XOR (^), invert (~), left shift (<<), and right shift (>>). For example, 5 & 3 yields 1 (binary 101 & 011 = 001), and ~5 inverts to -6 due to two's complement representation.
Operator precedence determines evaluation order in expressions with multiple operators, following a hierarchy from highest to lowest priority. Parentheses override this for explicit grouping. The precedence levels are:
PriorityOperators
1() (parentheses), (subscripting), {} (dictionary display), attribute references (.), function calls, await expressions
2Exponentiation (**)
3Unary positive (+), unary negative (-), bitwise NOT (~)
4Multiplication (*), matrix multiplication (@), division (/), floor division (//), remainder (%)
5Addition (+), subtraction (-)
6Bitwise left shift (<<), bitwise right shift (>>)
7Bitwise AND (&)
8Bitwise XOR (^)
9Bitwise OR (|)
10Comparisons (in, not in, is, not is, <, <=, >, >=, !=, ==)
11Logical NOT (not)
12Logical AND (and)
13Logical OR (or)
14Conditional expressions (ifelse)
15Lambda expressions
16Assignment expressions (:=)
Most operators associate left-to-right, except ** and conditional expressions, which associate right-to-left. This ensures unambiguous parsing, such as evaluating 2 + 3 * 4 as 2 + (3 * 4) to yield 14.
Boolean expressions rely on the concept of truthy and falsy values, where any value can be implicitly converted to a boolean via bool(). Falsy values include False, None, numeric zero (0, 0.0, etc.), empty sequences (e.g., "", , ()), and empty collections (e.g., {}, set()). All other values are truthy, such as non-empty lists or non-zero numbers. In conditional contexts, falsy values evaluate to false, enabling idiomatic checks like if my_list: to test non-emptiness. Logical operators leverage this for concise expressions, such as x or default_value to provide fallbacks.
Lambda expressions create anonymous functions using the syntax lambda arguments: expression, evaluating to a callable that returns the expression's value when invoked. They are limited to a single expression without statements, useful for short, inline functions in higher-order scenarios like map() or sorting keys. For example, add_one = lambda x: x + 1 defines a function adding 1 to its input. Lambdas have the lowest precedence, allowing them to wrap complex expressions.

Functions and Methods

Functions in Python are defined using the def keyword, which allows developers to create reusable blocks of code that can be invoked with arguments to perform specific tasks. This mechanism promotes modularity and code reuse, enabling functions to encapsulate logic and return values as needed. For instance, a basic function is declared as def function_name(parameters):, followed by an indented block of statements, and execution returns control to the caller upon completion unless a return statement is encountered.
Parameters in functions support positional arguments, which are passed in the order defined, and keyword arguments, which are specified by name for clarity and flexibility. Default values can be assigned to parameters, making them optional; for example, def greet(name, message="Hello"): allows calling greet("Alice") without specifying message. To handle variable numbers of arguments, Python uses *args for a tuple of positional extras and **kwargs for a dictionary of keyword extras, as in def flexible_func(*args, **kwargs):, facilitating functions that adapt to differing input sizes.
Scope rules in Python determine variable accessibility within functions. By default, variables assigned inside a function are local to that scope, but the global keyword declares a variable as referencing the module-level namespace, allowing modifications to outer globals. For nested functions, nonlocal refers to the nearest enclosing scope, enabling inner functions to alter outer variables without creating locals. The return statement not only exits the function but can also yield a value or None if omitted, supporting both void and value-returning behaviors.
Methods extend functions by binding them to class instances or classes, typically using the self parameter as the first argument in instance methods to reference the object itself. For example, within a class, def method(self, arg): accesses instance attributes via self.attribute. Class methods, denoted by the @classmethod decorator, receive the class as the first argument (conventionally cls), while @staticmethod methods operate without implicit arguments, functioning like regular functions but namespaced within the class.
Decorators provide a way to modify or enhance functions and methods using the @ syntax, applied directly above the definition; they wrap the original callable in another function for behaviors like logging, caching, or access control. Defined as higher-order functions that take and return callables, a simple decorator might be def my_decorator(func): def wrapper(*args, **kwargs): return func(*args, **kwargs) return wrapper, then used as @my_decorator def my_func(): .... The @staticmethod and @classmethod are built-in examples that alter method binding.
Generator functions introduce lazy evaluation by using the yield keyword instead of return, producing an iterator that yields values one at a time without computing the entire sequence upfront, which is memory-efficient for large or infinite series. Defined with def gen_func(): yield value, calling it returns a generator object; subsequent calls to next() resume execution from the last yield, pausing until the next invocation or exhaustion. This supports iterable protocols and is foundational for comprehensions and co-routines.

Typing Mechanisms

Python employs dynamic typing, where type checking occurs at runtime rather than compile time, allowing variables to hold values of any type without explicit declarations. This approach enables flexible code but can lead to runtime errors if types are mismatched.
To address these limitations while preserving dynamism, Python introduced optional type hints in version 3.5 through PEP 484, which standardizes annotations for parameters, return types, and variables using the typing module. For instance, a function can be annotated as def add(a: int, b: int) -> int: return a + b, providing hints for static analysis tools without affecting runtime behavior. These hints support gradual typing, where code can mix annotated and unannotated sections, enabling incremental adoption in existing projects.
External type checkers, such as mypy, enforce these annotations statically by analyzing code before execution, catching type errors early while allowing unannotated code to pass unchecked. Advanced typing features include generics for parameterized types, like List from the typing module, which specify container contents; unions, such as Union (or int | str since Python 3.10), for alternatives; and protocols for structural subtyping, enabling duck typing at the type level without inheritance, as defined in PEP 544.
Python 3.13 introduced further refinements to typing, including support for default values in type parameters (PEP 696), which allows type parameters to have defaults like def func(): ...; optimizations that reduce the import time of the typing module by approximately 33% by removing dependencies on re and contextlib; enhancements permitting lambdas and comprehensions within annotation scopes without inlining comprehensions into the parent scope; and removals of deprecated elements such as the typing.io and typing.re namespaces (deprecated since 3.8) and the keyword-argument method for creating TypedDict types (deprecated since 3.11).
Additionally, Python 3.14 implements deferred evaluation of annotations via PEP 649 and PEP 749, postponing their computation until needed by tools, which reduces import-time overhead in modules with complex type expressions.

Code Examples

Basic Syntax Demonstrations

Python's basic syntax emphasizes readability and simplicity, using indentation to define code blocks rather than braces or keywords. The following demonstrations illustrate essential elements through concise code snippets, showcasing how Python handles output, data types, iteration, and function definitions.
A fundamental program outputs a greeting using the built-in print function:
print("Hello, World!")
This executes directly in an interactive session or script, displaying the message on the console.
Python provides built-in types for common data structures. Integers and floats handle numeric values:
width = 20 # Integer
tax_rate = 0.05 # Float
Strings represent text:
message = "Python" # String
Lists are ordered, mutable collections:
numbers = # List
Dictionaries map keys to values:
phonebook = {'jack': 4098, 'sape': 4139} # Dictionary
These types support operations like arithmetic for numbers, indexing for strings and lists, and key access for dictionaries.
Control flow uses a for loop to iterate over sequences, such as the range built-in:
for i in range(5):
 print(i)
This prints the integers 0 through 4, demonstrating iteration over an arithmetic progression.
Functions are defined with the def keyword, allowing reusable code with parameters and return values:
def greet(name):
 return f"Hello, {name}"

print(greet("Python"))
Executing this prints "Hello, Python", using an f-string for formatted output within the return statement.

Practical Applications

Python's practical applications span a wide range of everyday programming tasks, leveraging its readable syntax to handle common operations efficiently. One fundamental capability is file input/output (I/O), which allows programs to read from and write to files on disk. For instance, to read the contents of a text file, Python uses the built-in open() function in a context manager to ensure proper resource handling:
with open('file.txt', 'r') as f:
 content = f.read()
print(content)
This approach automatically closes the file after the block executes, preventing resource leaks, and is recommended for all file operations in Python 3.
List comprehensions provide a concise way to create lists by applying expressions to iterables, often used for data transformation in practical scenarios like generating sequences or filtering datasets. A simple example computes the squares of numbers from 0 to 9:
squares = 
print(squares) # Output: 
This syntax is more readable and performant than equivalent loops, making it ideal for quick data manipulations in scripts or prototypes.
Exception handling enables robust error management in applications, catching and responding to runtime errors without crashing the program. In practice, it is used to gracefully handle operations that might fail, such as division by zero:
try:
 x = 1 / 0
except ZeroDivisionError:
 print("Error: Division by zero is not allowed")
This structure allows developers to define specific recovery actions, enhancing the reliability of code in real-world environments like data processing pipelines.
Object-oriented programming in Python is exemplified by defining classes to model real-world entities, encapsulating data and behavior. A basic class for a 2D point demonstrates initialization and attribute access:
class Point:
 def __init__(self, x, y):
 self.x = x
 self.y = y

p = Point(3, 4)
print(p.x, p.y) # Output: 3 4
Classes like this form the foundation for more complex structures in applications, such as simulations or GUI elements.
Since Python 3.5, asynchronous programming has become practical for I/O-bound tasks, using the asyncio module to handle concurrency without threads. An example defines and runs a simple async function that simulates a delay:
import asyncio

async def main():
 print("Starting")
 await asyncio.sleep(1)
 print("Done after 1 second")

asyncio.run(main())
This enables efficient handling of tasks like web requests or file polling in event-driven applications.

Standard Library

Core Modules

The core modules in Python's standard library form the foundation for everyday programming tasks, offering built-in tools for system interactions, numerical computations, temporal data handling, data serialization, and pattern matching without requiring external dependencies. These modules are imported using the import statement, as covered in basic syntax demonstrations. They emphasize portability, efficiency, and integration with Python's core language features to support a wide range of applications from scripting to application development.
The os and sys modules provide essential access to operating system interfaces and interpreter variables, enabling file system operations and handling of command-line arguments. The os module offers a portable way to interact with the file system, including functions for directory navigation, file manipulation, and environment variable access across platforms like Unix and Windows. For instance, os.listdir(path) returns a list of files and directories in the specified path, while os.chdir(path) changes the current working directory, and os.environ provides a dictionary of environment variables for process configuration. The sys module complements this by exposing system-specific parameters, such as sys.argv, a list where the first element is the script name and subsequent elements are command-line arguments passed to the program, facilitating script parameterization. Other key sys attributes include sys.path, which controls the module search path, and sys.exit(arg), which raises a SystemExit exception to terminate the interpreter with an optional status code. Together, these modules are indispensable for tasks like building command-line tools and managing runtime environments.
import os
import sys

# Example: List files in current directory
print(os.listdir('.'))

# Example: Access command-line arguments
if len(sys.argv) > 1:
 print(f"Argument: {sys.argv}")
The math module supplies a collection of mathematical functions and constants for numerical computations, drawing from the C standard library for performance. It includes fundamental constants such as math.pi (approximately 3.14159) and math.e (approximately 2.71828), which are used in calculations involving circles, exponentials, and logarithms. Trigonometric functions like math.sin(x), math.cos(x), and math.tan(x) compute sine, cosine, and tangent for angles in radians, supporting applications in geometry and signal processing. Additional utilities encompass math.sqrt(x) for square roots, math.exp(x) for e raised to the power x, math.log(x) for natural logarithms, and math.factorial(n) for computing the factorial of nonnegative integers, all returning float results unless specified otherwise.
import math

# Example: Compute area of a circle
radius = 5
area = math.pi * radius ** 2
print(area) # Output: 78.53981633974483
The datetime module implements classes for manipulating dates and times, focusing on arithmetic and formatting operations within the Gregorian calendar. Core classes include date for year-month-day representations (ranging from year 1 to 9999), time for hour-minute-second-microsecond values (from 00:00:00 to 23:59:59.999999), datetime combining both with optional timezone awareness, and timedelta for duration intervals supporting microsecond precision (up to about 999 million days). Key methods enable creation and conversion, such as datetime.now() for the current local datetime, timedelta(days=1) for one-day intervals, and arithmetic like adding a timedelta to a datetime object to advance time. Formatting uses strftime(format) to generate strings (e.g., '%Y-%m-%d') and strptime(string, format) for parsing, while isoformat() produces ISO 8601-compliant outputs for interoperability. This module is crucial for logging, scheduling, and data analysis involving temporal data.
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

# Example: Current time plus one day
now = datetime.now()
future = now + timedelta(days=1)
print(future.strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S'))
The json module facilitates encoding and decoding of JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) data, adhering to RFC 7159 for lightweight data interchange. It supports serialization of Python objects like dictionaries, lists, strings, numbers, booleans, and None into JSON strings or files via json.dumps(obj) for string conversion and json.dump(obj, fp) for writing to file-like objects, with options for indentation, sorting keys, and handling non-standard types through custom encoders. Deserialization reverses this with json.loads(s) parsing JSON strings into Python objects and json.load(fp) reading from files, including hooks for custom decoding like object construction from JSON primitives. The module handles basic type mappings (e.g., Python dict to JSON object) and ensures ASCII compatibility by default, making it suitable for web APIs, configuration files, and data persistence.
import json

# Example: Encode and decode a dictionary
data = {'name': 'Python', 'version': 3.14}
json_str = json.dumps(data, indent=2)
parsed = json.loads(json_str)
print(parsed) # Output: Python
The re module enables regular expression operations for pattern matching and text processing, compatible with Perl-style syntax and supporting Unicode strings. Patterns are defined using metacharacters (e.g., . for any character, * for zero or more repetitions) and escape sequences (e.g., \d for digits), compiled into reusable objects with re.compile(pattern, flags) to improve efficiency for repeated use; flags like re.IGNORECASE modify matching behavior for case-insensitivity or multiline inputs. Core functions include re.match(pattern, string) to anchor matches at the string's start, re.search(pattern, string) to find the first occurrence anywhere, and re.findall(pattern, string) to return all non-overlapping matches as a list of strings or tuples for grouped captures. Groups are delimited by parentheses, with named groups via (?P<name>...) for extraction, supporting tasks like validation, searching, and substitution in strings.
import re

# Example: Find all email-like patterns
text = "Contact: or "
emails = re.findall(r'\b+@+\.{2,}\b', text)
print(emails) # Output: ', '']

Specialized Packages

The Python standard library includes a variety of specialized packages that address domain-specific needs, such as networking, data persistence, structured data parsing, and concurrency, enabling developers to build robust applications without external dependencies. These packages are designed for reliability and integration within the core language ecosystem, often building on foundational modules like os for system interactions.
For networking, the http package collects modules essential for handling the HyperText Transfer Protocol, including http.client for creating HTTP clients that send requests and parse responses, and http.server for implementing simple HTTP servers suitable for development or lightweight serving. The http package also defines enums for HTTP status codes and common headers, facilitating protocol-compliant code. Complementing this, the urllib package provides tools for URL manipulation and resource fetching, with submodules like urllib.request offering functions such as urlopen to retrieve data from URLs via HTTP, FTP, or other protocols, and urllib.parse for decomposing and recomposing URLs into components like scheme, path, and query parameters. These modules support extensible authentication and error handling, making them foundational for web interactions in scripts.
The sqlite3 module offers a lightweight, serverless interface to SQLite databases, compliant with the DB-API 2.0 specification outlined in PEP 249, allowing execution of SQL queries, transaction management, and cursor-based data retrieval directly from Python code. It includes classes like Connection for database handles and Cursor for executing statements, with built-in support for parameterized queries to prevent SQL injection. This module is ideal for embedded applications, as SQLite stores data in a single file without requiring a separate server process.
For parsing structured data formats, the csv module enables reading and writing comma-separated values files, handling dialects like Excel or Unix styles, and providing classes such as csv.reader for iterating over rows as lists and csv.writer for generating output with proper quoting and escaping. It supports features like registering custom dialects via csv.register_dialect for varying delimiters and quote characters. Similarly, the xml package encompasses modules for XML processing, relying on the Expat library for parsing; key among them is xml.etree.ElementTree, which represents XML as a tree of Element objects, allowing parsing from files or strings with parse or fromstring, navigation via XPath-like expressions, and serialization back to XML. This API emphasizes simplicity for common tasks like configuration files or data exchange, while higher-level modules like xml.dom offer Document Object Model support for more complex manipulations.
Concurrency support in the standard library is provided by the multiprocessing and threading packages, which address parallelism in CPU-bound and I/O-bound tasks, respectively. The multiprocessing package enables process-based parallelism using an API similar to threading, with classes like Process for spawning subprocesses, Queue for inter-process communication, and Pool for managing worker pools to distribute tasks across multiple cores, effectively bypassing the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) for true parallelism. It supports shared memory via multiprocessing.shared_memory for efficient data exchange. In contrast, the threading module facilitates thread-based concurrency within a single process, using Thread objects to run functions concurrently, along with synchronization primitives like Lock, RLock, and Condition to manage shared resources and avoid race conditions. While threads are limited by the GIL for CPU-intensive work, they excel in I/O operations, such as network requests. Additionally, the new concurrent.interpreters module (added in Python 3.14) offers high-level interfaces for creating and managing multiple subinterpreters within the same process, enabling isolated execution environments and enhanced parallelism without sharing the GIL (per PEP 734).
A recent addition in Python 3.14, the annotationlib module introduces utilities for introspecting type annotations on modules, classes, and functions, supporting deferred evaluation to avoid runtime errors from forward references or complex expressions. It provides functions like get_annotations to retrieve annotations in formats such as VALUE (evaluated), FORWARDREF (unevaluated forward references), or STRING (unevaluated strings), enhancing tools for static analysis and IDE integration without immediate execution overhead. This module aligns with evolving type hinting practices, implementing deferred evaluation per PEP 649 (via PEP 749).

Third-Party Ecosystem

Popular Frameworks

Python's extensive third-party ecosystem includes numerous popular frameworks that facilitate development in key domains such as web applications, data science, machine learning, and automation. These tools leverage Python's simplicity and readability to enable efficient, scalable solutions, often building upon the standard library's foundations for core functionality.
In web development, FastAPI is a modern, high-performance framework for building APIs with Python 3.7+, emphasizing speed, automatic generation of interactive documentation using OpenAPI and Swagger UI, and support for asynchronous programming, making it particularly suitable for data-intensive applications. Django is a high-level, open-source framework that follows the model-template-view (MTV) architectural pattern, akin to model-view-controller (MVC), to support rapid development of complex, database-driven websites. It provides built-in features like an object-relational mapper (ORM), URL routing, authentication, and an administrative interface, making it suitable for full-stack applications. Flask, a minimalist microframework, offers core tools for building web applications with flexibility, including routing, templating via Jinja2, and debugging support, without imposing a rigid structure. This allows developers to integrate extensions as needed for smaller projects or prototypes.
For data science, NumPy forms the cornerstone library for numerical computing, providing support for multidimensional arrays, broadcasting, and linear algebra operations essential for scientific and engineering tasks. Pandas extends NumPy with powerful data structures like DataFrames and Series, enabling efficient data manipulation, cleaning, and analysis through operations such as grouping, merging, and time-series handling. Visualization is commonly handled by Matplotlib, a versatile plotting library that generates publication-quality figures, including line plots, histograms, and contour maps, with support for customization via Python scripts or interactive modes.
Machine learning frameworks have solidified Python's dominance in this field. TensorFlow, developed by Google, is an open-source platform for building and deploying machine learning models, offering tools for deep learning with tensors, neural networks, and distributed training across CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs. scikit-learn provides a robust set of simple and efficient tools for data mining and analysis, including supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms, model evaluation, and preprocessing pipelines, all integrated seamlessly with NumPy and SciPy.
Automation tasks benefit from specialized libraries like Selenium, an umbrella project for browser automation that allows scripting interactions with web elements for testing, scraping, and form submissions across multiple browsers. Beautiful Soup, designed for parsing HTML and XML documents, extracts structured data from unstructured markup, handling malformed input gracefully and supporting tree navigation and search.
A notable recent trend is the accelerated adoption of AI-focused libraries, exemplified by the Hugging Face Transformers, which offers easy access to thousands of pre-trained models for natural language processing, computer vision, and multimodal tasks, facilitating transfer learning and fine-tuning. This library experienced significant growth post-2020, amassing over 120,000 GitHub stars by 2024 and powering applications in over 10,000 organizations. Surveys indicate sustained popularity, with FastAPI, Django and Flask ranking among the top web frameworks used by 38%, 35% and 34% of Python developers, respectively, while NumPy and Pandas are utilized by more than half of those engaged in data processing.

Package Management

Python's package management ecosystem revolves around pip, the standard package installer included with Python distributions since version 3.4. Pip enables users to install, upgrade, and remove packages from the Python Package Index (PyPI), the official repository for third-party Python software. The basic command to install a package is pip install package_name, which downloads and installs the specified package along with its dependencies from PyPI. As of November 2025, PyPI hosts over 700,000 projects, making it a vast resource for extending Python's capabilities.
To prevent conflicts between projects requiring different package versions, Python provides virtual environments for isolating dependencies. The built-in venv module, available since Python 3.3, creates lightweight, self-contained environments where packages are installed independently of the global Python installation. Users create a virtual environment with python -m venv env_name, activate it (e.g., source env_name/bin/activate on Unix-like systems), and then use pip within it for installations. For more complex scenarios involving non-Python dependencies or multiple languages, Conda offers robust environment management through its conda create and conda install commands, supporting isolated spaces with specific Python versions and binaries.
Dependency management is facilitated by tools that declare and resolve project requirements. The requirements.txt file lists packages and versions in a simple format, such as numpy==1.24.3, allowing installation via pip install -r requirements.txt to ensure reproducible environments. For advanced resolution of transitive dependencies and lockfiles, Poetry provides a declarative approach using a pyproject.toml file, where dependencies are specified and automatically resolved with commands like poetry add package_name and poetry install.
Security in package management emphasizes auditing to detect vulnerabilities in installed packages. The pip-audit tool, developed by the Python Packaging Authority, scans environments or requirement files against the Python Packaging Advisory Database to identify known security issues, invoked via pip-audit for quick checks. This practice helps mitigate risks from supply chain attacks, complementing safe installation habits like using trusted indexes.

Development Environments

Integrated Development Environments

Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) for Python provide comprehensive tools that integrate code editing, debugging, testing, and project management into a single application, enhancing productivity for developers working on complex projects. These environments often include language-specific features like intelligent code completion, refactoring support, and integration with Python's ecosystem, making them essential for professional and large-scale development. Popular IDEs tailored for Python emphasize ease of use, extensibility, and support for frameworks and scientific computing.
IDLE (Integrated Development and Learning Environment) is the official IDE bundled with Python distributions, offering a simple yet effective environment for writing, running, and debugging Python code. It features a multi-window text editor with syntax highlighting, auto-completion, and call tips, alongside an interactive shell for immediate code execution and experimentation. IDLE includes a built-in debugger for setting breakpoints, stepping through code, and inspecting variables, making it particularly suitable for beginners, education, and lightweight scripting tasks across Windows, macOS, and Unix-like systems.
PyCharm, developed by JetBrains, is a professional IDE designed specifically for Python, offering advanced refactoring capabilities that allow safe code restructuring across entire projects, such as renaming variables or extracting methods while preserving functionality. It includes a robust debugger with features like conditional breakpoints, frame evaluation, and inline variable watching, enabling efficient identification and resolution of issues in Python applications. PyCharm provides dedicated support for web frameworks like Django, including code insights, template navigation, and run configurations tailored to Django projects, streamlining development workflows.
Visual Studio Code (VS Code), developed by Microsoft, functions as a lightweight code editor that transforms into a full-featured Python IDE through its official Python extension, which delivers IntelliSense for code completion, syntax highlighting, and error detection. The extension supports linting via integrated tools like Pylint or Flake8, automatically highlighting stylistic and semantic issues in real-time as code is written or saved, promoting code quality without manual checks. Additionally, it offers seamless integration with Jupyter notebooks, allowing users to create, edit, and execute interactive cells directly within the editor, with support for remote kernels and visualization of outputs like plots.
Spyder is an open-source IDE optimized for scientific Python development, featuring a multi-pane interface reminiscent of MATLAB, with an editor, interactive console, variable explorer, and plot viewer arranged for efficient data analysis workflows. It integrates closely with the Anaconda distribution, providing out-of-the-box support for libraries like NumPy, Pandas, and Matplotlib, including specialized viewers for arrays, DataFrames, and plots that allow inline editing and inspection. The IPython console in Spyder supports rich output rendering, magic commands, and history management, making it ideal for exploratory computing and prototyping in scientific domains.
In recent updates, PyCharm's 2025.2 release introduces AI-assisted coding features through the JetBrains AI Assistant plugin, including context-aware code generation, multi-line completions, and an AI Agents Debugger for transparent inspection of AI-driven code execution. These enhancements adapt to individual coding styles and support tasks like automated test creation, further boosting efficiency in Python development.

Editors and Tools

Text editors such as Vim and Emacs offer robust support for Python development through dedicated modes that provide syntax highlighting and other language-specific features. In Vim, syntax highlighting for Python is enabled by default via the built-in python.vim script, which colors keywords, strings, comments, and other elements according to patterns defined in the syntax file, allowing developers to distinguish code structures visually during editing. For enhanced functionality, the python-mode plugin extends Vim into a more comprehensive Python IDE, incorporating features like improved indentation, code folding, and integration with tools such as PyLint for on-the-fly analysis. Similarly, Emacs includes a built-in python-mode derived from the Python project's python-mode.el, which activates syntax highlighting through font-lock-mode to colorize code elements like functions, variables, and operators, facilitating efficient navigation and editing in large Python files. These modes align with Python's indentation-based syntax rules, such as those outlined in PEP 8, to ensure consistent code presentation.
Jupyter Notebooks serve as a versatile tool for interactive Python computing, particularly in data exploration and scientific workflows, by combining executable code cells with rich text, visualizations, and multimedia outputs in a web-based interface. Developed as part of Project Jupyter, notebooks allow users to execute Python code incrementally, inspect results in real-time, and share reproducible analyses, making them ideal for prototyping algorithms, plotting data with libraries like Matplotlib, and documenting experiments. The environment supports multiple kernels, but Python remains the primary language, enabling seamless integration with packages such as NumPy and Pandas for exploratory data analysis.
To maintain code quality, Python developers commonly use linters like Pylint and Flake8, which analyze source code for errors, style violations, and potential issues without executing the program. Pylint, a comprehensive static analyzer, checks for adherence to coding standards, detects unused variables, and enforces best practices by assigning scores to codebases, supporting Python 3.10 and later versions. Flake8, a lightweight wrapper around tools like pycodestyle, pyflakes, and McCabe, focuses on style enforcement per PEP 8, logical errors, and cyclomatic complexity, providing fast feedback during development. Complementing these, the Black formatter automatically reformats Python code to a consistent style, prioritizing readability by enforcing fixed line lengths, string quotes, and spacing rules in an opinionated manner that minimizes manual adjustments. For example, Black can transform irregularly formatted code into a uniform structure, as shown below:
# Before Black
def example(a,b):return a+b if a> b else b-a

# After Black
def example(a, b):
 return a + b if a > b else b - a
This integration of linters and formatters into editor workflows helps enforce team-wide consistency and reduces common pitfalls in Python projects.
For debugging, the built-in pdb module provides an interactive source-level debugger that allows setting breakpoints, stepping through code, inspecting variables, and evaluating expressions during execution. Invoked via commands like import pdb; pdb.set_trace() or the breakpoint() function in Python 3.7+, pdb supports post-mortem analysis of unhandled exceptions and conditional breakpoints, offering a command-line interface familiar to users of tools like GDB. While pdb operates independently, it can be integrated into editors or IDEs for a more graphical experience, such as pausing execution at breakpoints within Vim or Emacs sessions. This foundational debugger remains a staple for troubleshooting Python scripts, with extensions available for advanced tracing in larger applications.

Implementations

Reference Implementation

CPython is the canonical implementation of the Python programming language, serving as the reference interpreter and the default version distributed on python.org. Developed primarily in C with some components in Python itself, CPython has been the standard implementation since its first public release, Python 0.9.0, in February 1991. This implementation interprets Python source code by first compiling it into platform-independent bytecode, an intermediate representation executed by the CPython virtual machine. The compiled bytecode is cached in .pyc files within the __pycache__ directories to accelerate module loading on subsequent runs, avoiding recompilation unless the source file changes.
To maintain thread safety in its multi-threaded environment, CPython employs the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL), a mutex that ensures only one thread executes Python bytecode at a time, even on multi-core systems. This design simplifies memory management through reference counting but can limit parallelism in CPU-bound multi-threaded applications. The current stable release, CPython 3.14.0, was made available on October 7, 2025, incorporating enhancements in performance, standard library modules, and experimental features like an experimental free-threaded build without the GIL.
For integrating performance-critical code, CPython exposes a comprehensive C API that enables developers to write extension modules in C or C++. These extensions can define new built-in types, access Python objects, and interface with system libraries, allowing seamless calls from Python code while bypassing the interpreter's overhead for computationally intensive tasks. The API includes functions for argument parsing, error handling, and reference counting, with modules compiled and linked against the CPython library to form dynamically loadable .so or .pyd files.

Alternative Runtimes

While the reference implementation of Python, known as CPython, is written in C and serves as the standard, several alternative runtimes have been developed to execute Python code on diverse platforms, enabling integration with other ecosystems or optimization for specific environments. These implementations aim to maintain compatibility with Python's syntax and semantics where possible, though they may differ in supported features, performance characteristics, or library availability to suit their target domains.
Jython is a Java-based implementation of Python designed to run directly on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), allowing seamless integration with Java libraries and applications. It compiles Python code to Java bytecode, providing access to the full Java ecosystem for tasks like enterprise software development or leveraging Java's extensive class libraries. The current stable version, Jython 2.7.4, implements Python 2.7 semantics and requires Java 8 or later, though efforts are underway to support Python 3 features in future releases.
IronPython serves as an open-source implementation of Python targeted at the .NET Common Language Runtime (CLR), originally developed by Jim Hugunin and now maintained by the IronLanguages community. It enables Python developers to interact with .NET assemblies, making it suitable for Windows-centric applications, game development with Unity, or integration with C# codebases. IronPython primarily supports Python 2.7, with limited support for Python 3.4 via IronPython 3, and is cross-platform via .NET Core, allowing Python scripts to utilize .NET's rich set of frameworks and tools.
PyPy offers a fast, compliant alternative to CPython through its use of just-in-time (JIT) compilation, implemented via the RPython translation toolchain, which generates an interpreter in a subset of Python. It is designed for high compatibility with CPython's extension modules and standard library, supporting both Python 2.7 and Python 3.x, and is particularly valued for running pure Python code efficiently across various operating systems. PyPy's architecture allows it to serve as a drop-in replacement for many applications without code modifications. The latest release as of November 2025 is PyPy 7.3.20, supporting Python 3.11.
GraalPy is a high-performance implementation of Python 3.11 built on the GraalVM platform for the JVM, providing an embeddable runtime with excellent interoperability for polyglot applications mixing Python and Java code. It supports advanced features like JIT compilation via GraalVM and is compatible with many scientific libraries, making it suitable for data-intensive tasks in JVM environments.
For resource-constrained environments like microcontrollers and Internet of Things (IoT) devices, MicroPython provides a lean implementation of Python 3 with a minimal subset of the standard library, optimized to run on hardware with limited memory and processing power, such as ESP32 boards or Raspberry Pi Pico. CircuitPython, a beginner-friendly derivative of MicroPython developed by Adafruit, extends this by adding high-level hardware abstractions and a focus on educational use, supporting plug-and-play libraries for sensors and displays on low-cost boards. Both prioritize simplicity and real-time interaction with peripherals, making them ideal for embedded prototyping.
Older efforts, such as the Parrot Virtual Machine (PVM), explored implementing Python on a language-neutral bytecode interpreter intended for dynamic languages, but development ceased around 2017, leaving it unsupported and incompatible with modern Python code.

Performance Optimizations

Python's Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in the reference CPython implementation serializes execution of Python bytecode, preventing multiple native threads from executing simultaneously and limiting multi-core parallelism for CPU-bound tasks. This design choice simplifies memory management but necessitates workarounds like the multiprocessing module, which achieves true parallelism by spawning separate interpreter processes, each with its own GIL and memory space, thereby utilizing multiple CPU cores effectively for compute-intensive workloads.
To identify performance bottlenecks, developers rely on built-in profiling tools such as the cProfile module, which provides deterministic profiling by tracking function calls and execution times without altering program behavior significantly, and the timeit module, designed for benchmarking small code snippets by running them multiple times to measure average execution duration accurately. These tools output data that can be analyzed to prioritize optimizations, such as rewriting slow loops or replacing pure Python implementations with faster alternatives.
Recent versions of CPython have incorporated adaptive specialization in the interpreter to enhance speed, particularly for common operations like local variable access through optimized opcodes such as LOAD_FAST, resulting in overall performance gains of 5-10% over Python 3.11 on standard benchmarks. In Python 3.12, this includes inlining comprehensions for up to 2x speedup in those constructs.
Just-in-time (JIT) compilation in alternative implementations like PyPy accelerates loop-heavy code by tracing and optimizing hot paths at runtime, delivering 2-10x speedups on benchmarks dominated by iterative computations compared to CPython.
For even greater acceleration, Cython compiles Python-like code annotated with static types into optimized C extensions, bypassing the interpreter overhead and enabling near-C performance for numerical or algorithmic routines while maintaining compatibility with Python ecosystems.

Language Evolution

Governance and Development Process

The Python Software Foundation (PSF), established in 2001 as a non-profit organization, serves as the primary steward of the Python programming language, managing its intellectual property, licensing, and community support initiatives.
Python's governance is led by the Steering Council, a group of elected core developers responsible for high-level decisions on the language's direction, alongside contributions from the broader core development team. This structure was formalized in 2018 following the resignation of Guido van Rossum from his role as Benevolent Dictator for Life (BDFL), transitioning leadership to a collective model to ensure collaborative decision-making.
Significant changes to Python are proposed and tracked through Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs), a formal process outlined in PEP 0, which serves as the index and overview of all such proposals. PEPs are submitted via pull requests to the official GitHub repository, where they undergo review by the community and Steering Council before acceptance or rejection.
Since Python 3.9, the project has adopted an annual release cadence for major versions, with each new release typically occurring in October to introduce features, optimizations, and security updates while maintaining backward compatibility where feasible.
Contributions to Python are guided by the Python Developer's Guide, which details setup, testing, code style adherence (per PEP 8), and pull request submission processes, requiring first-time contributors to sign a Contributor Licensing Agreement. The PSF enforces a Code of Conduct promoting respectful collaboration, and diversity initiatives include the Diversity and Inclusion Working Group, which supports underrepresented communities through grants, mentorship, and events as of 2025.

Recent and Upcoming Changes

Python 3.12, released on October 2, 2023, introduced significant enhancements to error reporting and performance. Error messages were improved for greater clarity and helpfulness, including precise location indicators in f-strings via the PEG parser and contextual suggestions for common issues like missing imports or attribute typos. Additionally, dictionary, list, and set comprehensions benefited from inlining optimizations under PEP 709, resulting in execution speeds up to twice as fast in many cases.
Python 3.13, released on October 7, 2024, advanced concurrency capabilities with experimental support for a GIL-free execution mode as outlined in PEP 703. This allows building and running CPython without the Global Interpreter Lock, enabling true multi-threaded parallelism for CPU-bound tasks, though it remains opt-in via the python3.13t executable or --disable-gil configure flag. Free-threaded builds incorporate the mimalloc allocator by default to mitigate potential memory overheads, and while single-threaded performance may vary slightly, the mode targets improved scalability on multi-core systems.
Python 3.14, released on October 7, 2025, built on these foundations by officially supporting free-threaded Python under PEP 779, establishing criteria for stability and ecosystem compatibility to transition from experimental to production-ready status. It also introduced template strings via PEP 750, a generalization of f-strings prefixed with 't' that defer evaluation and return customizable Template objects for domain-specific processing, such as in web templating or configuration files. Deferred evaluation of annotations, supported through PEP 649 and PEP 749, stores type hints lazily to accelerate module imports by avoiding immediate resolution during loading. These changes contribute to startup speed improvements, with potential reductions of up to 50% in certain scenarios through optimized annotation handling and related bytecode efficiencies.
Development of Python 3.15 began in May 2025, with alpha 1 released on October 14, 2025, and the final release scheduled for October 1, 2026. Early features in alpha 1 include the new profiling.sampling module (PEP 799) for low-overhead, high-frequency performance profiling without code changes, and improved error messages for AttributeError and delattr() with contextual suggestions.

Adoption and Impact

Popularity and Usage Statistics

Python has maintained its position as the most popular programming language according to the TIOBE Programming Community Index since October 2021, achieving a rating of 23.37% in November 2025, which reflects its dominant share exceeding 20% throughout the year. This sustained leadership is evidenced by Python's highest-ever score of 26.98% in July 2025, underscoring its broad appeal across diverse development domains.
In the 2025 Stack Overflow Developer Survey, Python emerged as one of the fastest-growing languages, with usage increasing by 7 percentage points year-over-year to 54.8% among professional developers, and it was ranked as the most desired language by respondents seeking to expand their skills. This surge aligns with Python's role in high-demand areas, where over 49,000 developers reported its integration into daily workflows, particularly for AI-compatible tasks.
The GitHub Octoverse 2025 report highlights Python's robust activity on the platform, with 850,579 new contributors in the year, representing a 48.78% year-over-year growth, making it a top language by contributions despite TypeScript overtaking it in overall usage rankings. Python's growth is propelled by the AI and machine learning boom, where it powers the majority of workloads due to libraries like TensorFlow and PyTorch, alongside its prominence in education as the primary language in computer science curricula worldwide.
Regionally, Python exhibits strong adoption in the United States and Europe, particularly for data science applications, with Europe holding a 44.9% share of the global machine learning market where Python is the dominant tool. Globally, over 1.19 million job listings on platforms like LinkedIn required Python skills in 2025, with strong demand in areas like data science.

Common Applications

Python's versatility stems from its readable syntax and extensive ecosystem, making it a preferred choice across diverse domains. In web development, Python excels in backend services, where frameworks like Django and Flask enable rapid prototyping and scalable applications. Django, an open-source framework, powers high-traffic sites by providing built-in features for authentication, administration, and database management, as detailed in its official documentation. Similarly, Flask offers a lightweight approach for microservices and APIs, facilitating integration with front-end technologies.
In data analysis and scientific computing, Python serves as a cornerstone for processing large datasets and performing complex calculations. Libraries such as Pandas streamline data manipulation through DataFrames, allowing efficient handling of tabular data in scripts for exploratory analysis. SciPy extends this capability with tools for optimization, integration, and signal processing, widely used in research environments like astronomy and bioinformatics.
Automation and scripting represent another key application, where Python simplifies system administration and DevOps tasks. For instance, Ansible leverages Python for infrastructure as code, enabling configuration management across servers without requiring agents on target machines. This approach automates deployments and maintenance, reducing manual errors in IT operations.
Artificial intelligence and machine learning heavily rely on Python for model development and training. PyTorch, developed by Meta AI, provides dynamic neural networks and tensor computations, supporting research in computer vision and natural language processing. Its flexibility has accelerated advancements in deep learning, with applications in recommendation systems and autonomous vehicles.
Python's beginner-friendly design makes it ideal for education, where it introduces programming concepts without overwhelming syntax. Universities and coding bootcamps use it to teach fundamentals like loops and functions, fostering problem-solving skills in introductory courses. The language's emphasis on readability aligns with pedagogical goals, as evidenced by its adoption in curricula from institutions like MIT.
Emerging in edge computing, MicroPython enables lightweight Python implementations on microcontrollers for IoT devices. By 2025, it supports real-time data processing in resource-constrained environments, such as smart sensors and wearables, bridging traditional computing with embedded systems. This adaptation highlights Python's expansion into low-power applications, optimizing for efficiency in distributed networks.

Influenced Languages

Python has significantly influenced the design of several subsequent programming languages, particularly in areas such as syntax readability, dynamic typing, and ease of use for scripting and scientific computing. Its emphasis on clean, indentation-based structure and dynamic features has inspired developers seeking similar accessibility while addressing Python's performance limitations.
Ruby, created by Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto in the mid-1990s, drew from Python's scripting heritage and indentation-influenced syntax for blocks, though Matz critiqued Python's object-oriented features as insufficiently integrated, leading Ruby to prioritize pure OO principles with borrowed concepts like iterators. Ruby's block syntax and emphasis on developer-friendly readability reflect Python's impact on making code concise and expressive for everyday programming.
Swift, developed by Chris Lattner at Apple and released in 2014, adopted Python's approach to progressive complexity disclosure, allowing simple syntax for beginners while scaling to advanced systems programming. Lattner highlighted Python's expressiveness and ease of learning as benchmarks, influencing Swift's clean syntax, optional typing for safety, and REPL support to rival Python's scripting capabilities. This design enables Swift to handle tasks from quick prototypes to high-performance apps, blending Python-like intuition with compiled efficiency.
Julia, introduced in 2012 by Jeff Bezanson and collaborators, incorporates Python-like dynamic typing and interactive usability tailored for scientific computing, aiming to match Python's flexibility while achieving C-level speeds through just-in-time compilation. Its syntax and metaprogramming features echo Python's ecosystem integration, supporting seamless calls to Python libraries like NumPy, but with multiple dispatch for better numerical performance. This makes Julia a direct evolution for domains where Python's Global Interpreter Lock hinders parallelism.
Go (Golang), launched by Google in 2009 with contributions from Rob Pike, incorporates ideas for lightweight concurrency inspired by Python's threading models but extends them via goroutines and channels to overcome Python's limitations in parallel execution. While Go rejects Python's indentation for explicit braces, its focus on simplicity and built-in concurrency primitives provides a performant alternative for networked systems, drawing from Python's role in server-side scripting.
Mojo, released by Modular in 2023 and led by Chris Lattner, is explicitly designed as a superset of Python, retaining its syntax and dynamic features while adding static typing and systems-level controls for AI workloads. It supports full interoperability with Python code and libraries, enabling up to 68,000x speedups on compute-intensive tasks without abandoning Python's ease for rapid prototyping. Mojo's Pythonic structure positions it as an extension for high-performance AI, unifying scripting and deployment.

Additional Topics

Naming Conventions

Python, the programming language, derives its name from the British comedy series Monty Python's Flying Circus, chosen by its creator Guido van Rossum for being short, unique, and slightly mysterious.
The language follows specific naming conventions outlined in PEP 8, the official style guide for Python code, to promote readability and consistency across projects. Variables, functions, and most other identifiers use lowercase letters separated by underscores (snake_case), such as user_name or calculate_total(). In contrast, class names employ the CapWords convention (also known as PascalCase or UpperCamelCase), exemplified by MyClass or DataProcessor.
Python reserves 35 keywords as of version 3.14, which cannot be used as variable or function names due to their predefined syntactic roles; examples include def for defining functions, if for conditional statements, and import for module loading. These keywords are case-sensitive and always lowercase.
For modules, which are individual Python files, names should be short, all-lowercase, and may include underscores if they enhance readability, such as my_module.py. Packages, which are directories containing modules, follow a similar pattern but prefer short, all-lowercase names without underscores to avoid confusion with module names.

Known Limitations

One of Python's most prominent limitations stems from the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in its reference implementation, CPython, which serializes access to Python bytecodes, preventing multiple native threads from executing simultaneously and thus hindering multi-threaded performance for CPU-bound tasks. This design choice simplifies memory management and avoids race conditions but restricts parallelism on multi-core processors, making Python less suitable for applications requiring high-throughput concurrent computation without resorting to alternative approaches. Experimental free-threaded builds, introduced in Python 3.13, allow disabling the GIL to enable true thread parallelism, but they impose a single-threaded performance overhead of approximately 5-10% in Python 3.14 depending on the platform and compiler, and face compatibility challenges with existing C extensions that assume GIL presence, often requiring those extensions to re-enable the lock or face instability.
As an interpreted language, Python incurs runtime overhead from bytecode interpretation, resulting in execution speeds typically one to two orders of magnitude slower than compiled languages like C for compute-intensive operations, such as numerical simulations or large-scale data processing. This disparity arises because Python code is executed line-by-line via the interpreter rather than being compiled to optimized machine code ahead of time, leading to higher latency in performance-critical scenarios despite optimizations in recent versions.
Python's support for graphical user interfaces (GUIs) is limited in its standard library, with Tkinter serving as the primary tool but offering only basic widgets, rudimentary styling, and no built-in support for advanced features like drag-and-drop or modern theming, which often necessitates third-party frameworks for professional desktop or mobile applications. This reliance on external libraries, such as PyQt or Kivy, introduces additional dependencies and potential cross-platform inconsistencies, particularly for mobile development where native integration remains challenging.
The shift from Python 2 to Python 3, initiated in 2008, involved deliberate breaking changes to improve language consistency and usability, but these incompatibilitiessuch as print statement syntax and Unicode handlinghave left lingering effects on legacy codebases, with some enterprises still grappling with migration costs and dependency conflicts as of 2025. Although Python 2 reached end-of-life in 2020,

References

https://docs.python.org/3/faq/general.html

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/introduction.html

https://www.python.org/

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3142/

https://www.python.org/about/apps/

https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/python/

https://www.python.org/doc/essays/foreword/

https://ir.cwi.nl/pub/5008

https://docs.python.org/3/license.html

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/2.0.html

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-300/

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.0.html

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/2.5.html

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.5.html

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3100/

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3120/

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3140/

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.14.html

https://www.python.org/doc/sunset-python-2/

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3130/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0719/

https://devguide.python.org/versions/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0020/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0206/

https://gnosis.cx/publish/programming/charming_python_b22.html

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/interpreter.html

https://docs.python.org/3/howto/functional.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/inspect.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html

https://docs.python.org/3/extending/extending.html

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#indentation

https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#indentation

https://docs.python.org/3/faq/design.html

https://pypi.org/project/autopep8/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#tabs-or-spaces

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html#if-statements

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/controlflow.html#if-statements

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html#the-for-statement

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html#the-while-statement

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/controlflow.html#for-statements

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/controlflow.html#the-while-statement

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/controlflow.html#break-and-continue-statements-and-else-clauses-on-loops

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html#the-try-statement

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html#handling-exceptions

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html#the-match-statement

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.10.html#pep-634-structural-pattern-matching

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/controlflow.html#match-statements

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#binary-arithmetic-operations

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#additional-methods

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#comparisons

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#boolean-operations

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#binary-bitwise-operations

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#operator-precedence

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#lambda

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/index.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/types.html

https://peps.python.org/pep-0484/

https://docs.python.org/3/library/typing.html

https://typing.python.org/en/latest/spec/concepts.html

https://mypy-lang.org/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0544/

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.13.html

https://peps.python.org/pep-0696/

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/inputoutput.html

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html

https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/controlflow.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/math.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/json.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/index.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/http.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/urllib.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/sqlite3.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/csv.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/xml.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/xml.etree.elementtree.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/threading.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.interpreters.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/annotationlib.html

https://blog.jetbrains.com/pycharm/2025/08/the-state-of-python-2025/

https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/installing-packages/

https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/user_guide/

https://pypi.org/

https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html

https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html

https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format/

https://python-poetry.org/docs/managing-dependencies/

https://pypi.org/project/pip-audit/

https://packaging.python.org/guides/tool-recommendations/

https://docs.python.org/3/library/idle.html

https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/

https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/tools.html

https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/web-development/django/

https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/python

https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/linting

https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/datascience/jupyter-notebooks

https://www.spyder-ide.org/

https://docs.spyder-ide.org/current/panes/variableexplorer.html

https://docs.spyder-ide.org/current/panes/ipythonconsole.html

https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/whatsnew/

https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/features/ai/

https://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/syntax.html

https://github.com/python-mode/python-mode

https://svn.python.org/projects/python/trunk/Misc/python-mode.el

https://jupyter.org/

https://jupyter-notebook.readthedocs.io/en/stable/notebook.html

https://pylint.readthedocs.io/

https://flake8.pycqa.org/

https://black.readthedocs.io/

https://github.com/psf/black

https://docs.python.org/3/library/pdb.html

https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-cpython

https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-bytecode

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/import.html#pyc-invalidation

https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-global-interpreter-lock

https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/index.html

https://www.jython.org/

https://www.jython.org/download.html

https://ironpython.net/

https://github.com/IronLanguages/ironpython3

https://www.pypy.org/

https://doc.pypy.org/en/latest/introduction.html

https://www.graalvm.org/python/

https://micropython.org/

https://circuitpython.org/

http://www.parrot.org/

https://wiki.python.org/moin/PythonAndParrot

https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/

https://docs.python.org/3/library/profile.html

https://docs.python.org/3/library/timeit.html

https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.12.html

https://peps.python.org/pep-0709/

https://speed.pypy.org/

https://www.pypy.org/performance.html

https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/source_files_and_compilation.html

https://cython.org/

https://www.python.org/psf/about/

https://www.python.org/psf/summary/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0013/

https://peps.python.org/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0001/

https://github.com/python/peps

https://peps.python.org/pep-0602/

https://devguide.python.org/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/

https://policies.python.org/python.org/code-of-conduct/

https://www.python.org/community/diversity/

https://wiki.python.org/psf/DiversityandInclusionWG

https://peps.python.org/pep-0701/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0779/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0750/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0649/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0810/

https://peps.python.org/pep-0790/

https://docs.python.org/3.15/whatsnew/3.15.html

https://peps.python.org/pep-0799/

https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/

https://www.infoworld.com/article/4033860/python-popularity-boosted-by-ai-coding-assistants-tiobe.html

https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2025/

https://stackoverflow.blog/2025/07/29/developers-remain-willing-but-reluctant-to-use-ai-the-2025-developer-survey-results-are-here/

https://octoverse.github.com/

https://www.forbes.com/sites/janakirammsv/2025/11/01/10-key-takeaways-from-github-octoverse-2025-report/

https://sqmagazine.co.uk/machine-learning-statistics/

https://inveritasoft.com/blog-python-development-trends-innovations-and-latest-technology

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/europe-python-courses-market-comprehensive-analysis-drivers-a0gvc/

https://julialang.org/blog/2012/02/why-we-created-julia/

https://developers.slashdot.org/story/01/12/01/0110233/interview-with-the-creator-of-ruby

https://atp.fm/205-chris-lattner-interview-transcript

https://developers.slashdot.org/story/17/01/23/085232/slashdots-interview-with-swift-creator-chris-lattner

https://go.dev/doc/faq

https://www.modular.com/blog/mojo-its-finally-here

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#keywords

https://docs.python.org/3/howto/free-threading-python.html

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347793255_Comparative_Analysis_of_C_and_Python_in_Terms_of_Memory_and_Time

https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Comparison-of-C-C-Python-and-Julia-language-performance-for-a-set-of-short-algorithms_fig3_374476055

https://docs.python.org/3/library/tkinter.html

https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/python-programming-on/1565926218/ch20s01s02.html
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion