qsort Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
qsort
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 qsort is a standard library function in the C programming language, declared in the header file <stdlib.h>, designed to sort an array of arbitrary objects in ascending order based on a user-defined comparison function.
The function operates in place, taking four parameters: a pointer to the base of the array, the number of elements (nel), the size of each element in bytes (width), and a pointer to a comparison function (compar) that returns a negative value if the first argument is less than the second, zero if equal, and positive otherwise. If nel is zero, no operations are performed. The sorting is not required to be stable, meaning the relative order of equal elements may not be preserved.
Introduced as part of the ANSI/ISO C89 standard and included in subsequent C standards (C99, C11, C17, C23), qsort is also specified in POSIX.1-2001 and later. Although the C standard does not mandate a specific algorithm, the name derives from the quicksort method, and most implementations, including those in Microsoft Visual C++ and GNU libc, use a variant of quicksort for its average-case time complexity of O(n log n). Quicksort itself was invented by British computer scientist C. A. R. Hoare and first described in his 1961 paper "Algorithm 64: Quicksort" published in Communications of the ACM.
In C11, an enhanced version called qsort_s was introduced, providing additional runtime-constraint checking and support for a context parameter in the comparator to improve safety and flexibility. The function has no return value in the basic form and is widely used for its generality in sorting data structures beyond simple numeric arrays, such as structures or strings, by customizing the comparator.

Overview

Definition and Purpose

qsort is a polymorphic sorting function provided by the C standard library in the header file <stdlib.h>. It enables the sorting of arrays containing objects of any type by accepting a user-supplied comparison function that defines the ordering criterion. The function operates on a contiguous block of memory representing the array, without requiring prior knowledge of the element types built into the library.
The primary purpose of qsort is to facilitate generic sorting in C programs, allowing developers to impose a total order on elements through a customizable comparison. By default, it arranges elements in ascending order when using a standard less-than comparison, but the function's flexibility accommodates descending or other orders by inverting the comparison logic. This design promotes reusability across diverse data structures, from integers to complex user-defined types, as long as the comparison establishes a strict weak ordering without modifying the array contents during evaluation.
Key constraints govern the use of qsort to ensure correct behavior: the input array pointer must not be null if the number of elements exceeds zero, as passing a null pointer with a positive count results in undefined behavior. The comparison function, which takes two const void pointers as arguments and returns an int, must consistently return a negative value if the first element is less than the second, zero if equal, and positive otherwise; inconsistencies or side effects in the comparison can lead to incorrect sorting or crashes. Additionally, the function does not guarantee stability, meaning equal elements may appear in any relative order after sorting.
The name qsort derives from its original implementation using the quicksort algorithm, though the C standard imposes no requirement to use quicksort specifically, allowing library implementations to vary for performance or robustnesssuch as employing merge sort in the GNU C Library when auxiliary memory is available, or other hybrid algorithms in various implementations to improve performance and avoid worst-case scenarios.

Function Prototype and Parameters

The qsort function is declared in the <stdlib.h> header with the following prototype:
void qsort(void *base, (/page/Size) nmemb, (/page/Size) size, int (*compar)(const void *, const void *));
This function sorts the array in place using a comparison function provided by the user.
The base parameter is a pointer to the first element of the array to be sorted. The nmemb parameter specifies the number of elements in the array. The size parameter indicates the size in bytes of each element in the array. The compar parameter is a pointer to a user-defined comparison function that takes two pointers to const void (representing elements from the array) and returns an integer less than, equal to, or greater than zero to indicate the relative order of the elements.
The function returns void and does not produce a return value. However, on failure due to invalid arguments (such as a null pointer for base or compar), it may set errno to EINVAL.
If nmemb is 0, no operations are performed. Behavior is undefined if size is 0 and nmemb > 0, or if the comparison function returns inconsistent results (e.g., failing to define a total order).
As an in-place sorting algorithm, qsort does not allocate additional memory proportional to the input size for the elements themselves, but recursive implementations typically require O(log n) stack space on average and up to O(n) in the worst case due to partitioning. Some implementations mitigate this with hybrid approaches or temporary allocations.

Algorithm and Implementation

Quicksort Fundamentals

Quicksort is a divide-and-conquer sorting algorithm that recursively partitions an array around a chosen pivot element, placing elements smaller than the pivot to its left and larger elements to its right, before applying the same process to the resulting subarrays. This approach, originally described by C. A. R. Hoare in his 1962 paper, resolves the sorting problem by breaking it into smaller subproblems that are solved independently, with the partitioning step ensuring the pivot ends up in its final sorted position after each recursion level. The algorithm's efficiency stems from this balanced division, which minimizes the depth of recursion in typical cases.
Pivot selection plays a crucial role in achieving balanced partitions and avoiding degenerate cases. Common strategies include choosing the first, last, or middle element of the subarray, though these can lead to poor performance on sorted data. A widely adopted improvement is the median-of-three method, which selects the pivot as the median value among the first, middle, and last elements; this reduces the likelihood of extreme imbalances and improves average-case performance by approximately 5-10% in practice. The choice of pivot directly influences partition quality, with ideally balanced splits (near the median) yielding logarithmic recursion depth.
The partitioning process rearranges elements in place using two pointers that traverse the subarray from opposite ends, swapping elements that are out of order relative to the pivot until the pointers meet. This linear-time operation (O(n)) ensures all elements less than the pivot precede it, and all greater follow, while elements equal to the pivot may end up on either side depending on the implementation. Hoare's original scheme uses this two-pointer technique for efficiency, avoiding auxiliary space beyond the recursion stack.
Quicksort's time complexity is analyzed via the recurrence relation for its running time:
T(n)=T(k)+T(nk1)+(n) T(n) = T(k) + T(n - k - 1) + \Theta(n) T(n)=T(k)+T(nk1)+(n)
where $ n $ is the subarray size and $ k $ is the pivot's final position (number of elements less than the pivot). Assuming random pivot selection, which leads to expected balanced partitions, the average-case time complexity solves to $ O(n \log n) $. However, in the worst casesuch as when the pivot is consistently the smallest or largest elementpartitions become highly unbalanced, yielding $ O(n^2) $ time. The space complexity is $ O(\log n) $ on average due to the recursion depth, though it can reach $ O(n) $ in the worst case.
Quicksort is an unstable sorting algorithm, as the partitioning swaps can reorder elements with equal keys, violating the preservation of their relative order from the input. This instability arises inherently from the in-place swaps during partitioning, though modifications like key augmentation with indices can achieve stability at the cost of additional space and time.

Specifics of qsort Implementation

Although named after quicksort, the qsort function in standard C libraries is not required by the C standard to use any particular algorithm; implementations may employ quicksort variants or other methods as long as they correctly sort the array according to the provided comparator and do not guarantee stability. Many implementations, including those in Microsoft Visual C++ and various BSD libcs, use an unstable variant of quicksort, often employing the Hoare or Lomuto partitioning scheme to divide the array around a pivot element. In such cases, the instability arises because partitioning swaps elements that may alter the relative order of equal keys, such as when processing arrays with duplicates.
Many quicksort-based implementations hybridize quicksort with insertion sort for subarrays below a small threshold, typically 7 to 20 elements, to reduce overhead from recursive calls and improve performance on nearly sorted data. For instance, the threshold of 7 elements balances the logarithmic partitioning cost against insertion sort's linear efficiency on tiny arrays.
Optimizations commonly include median-of-three pivot selectionchoosing the middle value among the first, middle, and last elementsto approximate a balanced partition and mitigate worst-case O(n) behavior on sorted or reverse-sorted inputs. Randomization of the pivot further resists adversarial inputs that exploit predictable choices, while Bentley and McIlroy's 1993 improvements incorporate adaptive sampling and "fat" partitioning to achieve near-optimal 1.094n lg n comparisons even on non-random data, enhancing robustness against quadratic degeneration.
Implementations vary across libraries: glibc employs a stable mergesort algorithm with a heapsort fallback if memory allocation fails, avoiding recursion entirely to prevent stack issues. In contrast, musl libc uses smoothsort, an adaptive heapsort variant based on Leonardo numbers that achieves O(n) time on nearly sorted arrays without partitioning or recursion.
Security considerations include vulnerability to algorithmic complexity attacks, where an adversary crafts input to force O(n) performance via poor pivots in quicksort-based versions, as demonstrated by dynamic comparison observation in the "killer adversary" model. If the user-provided comparison function is exploitablesuch as through non-transitive logic or side-channel leaksno built-in safeguards exist to detect or mitigate denial-of-service risks.
Performance characteristics emphasize in-place operation in quicksort variants, requiring O(1) extra space beyond recursion, but recursive partitioning risks stack overflow for arrays exceeding 10 to 10 elements in the worst case due to O(n) depth. Non-recursive designs like glibc's mergesort eliminate this limitation at the cost of temporary allocation.

Usage

Basic Example in C

The qsort function can be demonstrated with a simple C program that sorts an array of integers in ascending order. The following complete example includes the necessary header inclusions, a comparison function for integers, the array declaration, the call to qsort, and output to verify the result.
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int compar(const void *a, const void *b) {
 if (*(int*)a < *(int*)b) return -1;
 if (*(int*)a > *(int*)b) return 1;
 return 0;
}

int main() {
 int arr = {3, 1, 4};
 int n = sizeof(arr) / sizeof(arr);
 
 qsort(arr, n, sizeof(int), compar);
 
 for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
 printf("%d ", arr);
 }
 printf("\n");
 
 return 0;
}
This code begins by including <stdlib.h> for the qsort declaration and <stdio.h> for input/output functions. The compar function is defined to compare two integers pointed to by its arguments: it casts the void* parameters to int* and uses relational operators to return -1 if the first is smaller, 0 if equal, and 1 if larger, as required by the standard. This approach avoids potential integer overflow issues that could occur with direct subtraction. In main, an array arr is initialized with unsorted integers {3, 1, 4}, and its size n is computed using sizeof. The qsort call sorts the array in place, using arr as the base address, n as the number of elements, sizeof(int) as the width of each element, and compar as the comparison routine. Finally, a loop prints the sorted elements.
When executed, the program outputs: 1 3 4, confirming the array has been sorted in ascending order.
To compile and run this example on a system with GCC, save the code to a file named example.c and execute gcc example.c -o example followed by ./example.
This example assumes valid input parameters, such as a non-null base pointer and positive element count, with no error checking implemented for simplicity.

Comparison Functions and Advanced Usage

The comparison function, often referred to as compar, is a critical component of qsort that defines the ordering of elements in the array. It must adhere to a signature of int compar(const void *a, const void *b), where the arguments point to the elements being compared, and it returns a negative value if the element pointed to by a precedes b, zero if they are equivalent, and a positive value otherwise. To ensure correct sorting, the comparison must establish a total order: it should be transitive (if a precedes b and b precedes c, then a precedes c), antisymmetric (if a precedes b, then b does not precede a), and total (for any distinct a and b, exactly one precedes the other). Failure to meet these properties can result in undefined behavior, such as incorrect ordering or infinite recursion in the partitioning process.
For basic data types like strings, the standard strcmp function from <string.h> serves as a suitable comparator, returning negative, zero, or positive based on lexicographical order. When sorting structures by a specific field, such as an integer member, the comparator casts the pointers to the structure type and compares the field directly; for instance, to sort by an id field, it would evaluate ((struct item*)a)->id against ((struct item*)b)->id using relational operators. To achieve descending order, the comparator can negate the result of an ascending comparison, such as return -compare_ascending(a, b);, ensuring the return values maintain the required sign convention.
Advanced usage extends to sorting arrays of pointers to structures, where the comparator dereferences the pointers to access the underlying data, for example, comparing *((struct item**)a) and *((struct item**)b) by a key field. Multi-key sorting, such as first by name and then by age if names are equal, involves sequential comparisons: invoke strcmp on name fields, and only if zero, proceed to age comparison using subtraction or relational operators. When handling potential NULL pointers in such arrays, the comparator should explicitly check for NULL (e.g., if a is NULL, return -1 to place it first), but this must preserve the total order to avoid inconsistencies.
Best practices emphasize treating the comparator as a pure function with no side effects, such as modifications to global state or the array itself, to prevent non-deterministic behavior during repeated calls. Always cast from const void* to const pointers of the target type to maintain const-correctness and avoid compiler warnings or undefined behavior from improper casting. Since qsort is inherently unstableequivalent elements may not retain their relative orderapplications requiring stability should consider alternative sorting functions or add tie-breaking keys in the comparator. Thorough testing of the comparator across edge cases, including duplicates and extremes, is essential to verify the total order.
Common pitfalls include using subtractive comparisons like *(int*)a - *(int*)b, which can cause integer overflow (e.g., when comparing INT_MIN and values near INT_MAX), leading to incorrect signs; instead, use explicit relational operators such as if (*(int*)a < *(int*)b) return -1; else if (*(int*)a > *(int*)b) return 1; else return 0;. Another issue arises from non-total orders, such as cyclic relations (e.g., rock-paper-scissors logic), which violate transitivity and can trap the algorithm in infinite recursion during partitioning.

History

Origins in Early Unix

The qsort function originated in the early development of the Unix operating system at Bell Labs, where it was introduced as an assembly language subroutine in Version 2 Unix, released in 1972. Named "qsort" in its initial implementation, it appeared in the source file /usr/src/cmd/sort.s as part of the library routines supporting the system's sort command. This early version provided a basic interface for sorting arrays of objects, including unequal-length strings, without a user-supplied comparison function, relying instead on a default mechanism for byte-string comparisons. The subroutine was documented in the Unix Programmer's Manual, Second Edition, under Section III (Subroutines) as "qsort: quicker sort," highlighting its role in efficient in-place sorting for system utilities.
By Version 3 Unix in 1973, qsort was reimplemented in the emerging C language, marking a significant evolution toward portability and generality in the standard library. This update introduced a user-definable comparison function called "compar," allowing programmers to specify custom ordering for arbitrary data types, which addressed limitations in the assembly-based predecessor. The interface in V3 specified calling via jsr pc,qsort, with registers r1 (base address of the data array), r2 (address of one past the end), and r3 (element width in bytes); the routine sorted the array in place using a quicksort variant, destroying temporary registers r0r4 upon return, and invoked compar for pairwise element comparisons. This enhancement was part of broader efforts by Dennis Ritchie and Brian Kernighan to build a robust C standard library, influenced by prior sorting algorithms like Shellsort (shellsrt) for handling non-uniform data distributions in commands such as sort. Key contributors to Unix's foundational tools, including qsort, were Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson, who drove the system's design and implementation during this period.
In the pre-ANSI C era, qsort served primarily as an internal utility for Unix commands like sort, enabling efficient processing of text files and system data without the full generality of later standards. Its integration into the sort command demonstrated early Unix's emphasis on reusable, efficient algorithms for practical computing tasks, laying groundwork for qsort's eventual standardization while avoiding the overhead of more complex sorting methods. Documentation from the V2 manual (page 193) underscores its role as a core subroutine, reflecting the system's minimalist yet powerful library philosophy.

Standardization and Evolution

The qsort function was formally standardized in 1989 as part of the ANSI C (C89) standard, with its prototype declared in the <stdlib.h> header as void qsort(void *base, size_t nmemb, size_t size, int (*compar)(const void *, const void *)). This specification required the function to sort an array of nmemb elements, each of size bytes, into ascending order based on the user-supplied comparison function compar, but it did not mandate the use of the quicksort algorithm specifically; any correct sorting implementation was permissible to ensure portability across systems.
In 1993, Jon L. Bentley and M. Douglas McIlroy published a seminal paper detailing significant enhancements to qsort implementations, focusing on improved partitioning schemes to enhance resistance to worst-case O(n) performance. Their approach incorporated adaptive pivot selectionusing the middle element for small arrays, median-of-three for medium-sized ones, and a pseudo-median of nine for larger arraysalong with a three-way partitioning method inspired by the Dutch National Flag algorithm, which efficiently handles duplicates and reduces the expected number of comparisons to approximately 1.094 n log n. This refined qsort was adopted into the BSD libc, replacing earlier versions and demonstrating up to 12 times faster performance on benchmarks like sorting 10,000 integers.
The vulnerabilities of quicksort-based qsort implementations were starkly demonstrated in 1998 when M. Douglas McIlroy introduced AntiQuicksort, an adversarial input generator that exploits predictable pivot choices to force quadratic time complexity in even robust variants, such as the 1993 Bentley-McIlroy design. This exploit underscored the need for defenses against algorithmic complexity attacks, prompting the development and adoption of hybrid sorting strategies, such as introsort (which limits quicksort recursion depth and falls back to heapsort) and non-recursive quicksort variants with explicit stack management, in libraries including glibc during the late 1990s.
Subsequent C standards, including C99 and C11, introduced no major changes to the core qsort interface or behavior, maintaining compatibility while clarifying aspects such as the handling of zero-element arrays (no action taken) and the fact that qsort itself does not set errno, though the comparison function may do so if it encounters errors. The original Unix qsort from the 1970s, implemented in assembly and lacking such safeguards, exhibited poor robustness against adversarial inputs, a limitation that modern evolutions in standard libraries have systematically addressed through these refinements. In January 2024, a memory corruption vulnerability was identified in glibc's qsort implementation, stemming from inadequate bounds checking when the comparator function modifies the array, affecting versions from at least 1992 to 2.38.

Extensions and Variants

Thread-Safe and Reentrant Versions

The standard qsort function is not inherently reentrant or thread-safe when the comparison function relies on global or static variables, as concurrent calls can lead to race conditions or undefined behavior in multi-threaded programs. To address these issues, several extensions have been developed that pass context parameters to the comparator, enabling per-invocation state without shared globals.
The qsort_r function, available in BSD systems (with FreeBSD updating its prototype in version 14.0 to match POSIX) and GNU libc since version 2.8 (released in 2008), extends qsort by adding a void *thdparam argument that is passed to the comparison function, allowing thread-local or call-specific context to be provided without modifying global state. This interface was standardized in POSIX.1-2024. Its prototype is void qsort_r(void *base, size_t nmemb, size_t size, int (*compar_r)(const void *, const void *, void *), void *thdparam);, where compar_r receives the additional thdparam as its third argument. GNU libc has supported qsort_r since version 2.8, released in 2008, facilitating its use in Linux environments for reentrant sorting.
In the C11 standard, qsort_s provides a bounds-checked variant with enhanced security features, including an additional context parameter for the comparator and the use of rsize_t for element count and size to prevent integer overflows that could lead to buffer overruns. The prototype is errno_t qsort_s(void *base, rsize_t nmemb, rsize_t size, int (*compar)(const void *, const void *, void *), void *context);, where it returns an error code via errno_t if constraints like excessive sizes are violated, rejecting sorts that exceed RSIZE_MAX to mitigate denial-of-service risks. This function, part of the optional Annex K for secure coding, promotes thread safety by enabling context-passing comparators while enforcing runtime bounds checks.
For environments integrating with Objective-C, such as macOS and FreeBSD, qsort_b offers a block-based alternative that passes the comparison logic as a block literala closure-like constructavoiding the need for function pointers or external context parameters. Its prototype is void qsort_b(void *base, size_t nmemb, size_t size, int (^compar)(const void *, const void *));, where the block compar captures local variables directly, improving readability and safety in multi-threaded Objective-C applications by encapsulating state within the block. This variant is particularly useful for inline sorting definitions without global dependencies.

Comparisons to Modern Sorting Functions

The std::sort function in C++ provides a template-based, type-safe alternative to qsort, typically implemented using introsorta hybrid algorithm combining quicksort with heapsort and insertion sort to guarantee O(n log n) worst-case time complexity. Unlike qsort, which requires a separate comparison function pointer, std::sort allows the compiler to inline the comparison logic, reducing overhead and enabling optimizations specific to the data type, resulting in generally superior performance and safety.
In Java, Arrays.sort employs TimSorta stable, adaptive hybrid of merge sort and insertion sortfor reference types, achieving O(n log n) worst-case time complexity while preserving the relative order of equal elements and efficiently handling partially sorted data. For primitive types, it uses dual-pivot quicksort, an optimized variant that often outperforms standard quicksort on random data by reducing the number of comparisons. These built-in implementations integrate seamlessly with Java's primitives and objects, minimizing manual error-prone coding compared to qsort's generic interface.
Python's sorted() function and list.sort() method rely on Timsort, the same stable, O(n log n) adaptive algorithm as Java's for objects, but extended to handle iterators and custom key functions for greater flexibility in sorting complex data structures. This user-friendly design abstracts away low-level details, making it slower than qsort for large arrays interfaced via C extensions due to Python's interpreted overhead, yet more intuitive for general-purpose scripting.
While qsort offers advantages in lightweight portability across C environments and in-place sorting with minimal memory overheadideal for resource-constrained settingsit suffers from disadvantages like manual memory management, lack of type safety, and vulnerability to comparison function errors, such as undefined behavior from inconsistent return values. Modern programming trends favor language-integrated builtins like those above for their safety and efficiency, yet qsort endures in embedded and low-level C code, including IoT applications, where its simplicity supports deterministic behavior without heavy runtime dependencies.

References

qsort

qsort, qsort_s - cppreference.com

qsort | Microsoft Learn

qsort

Array Sort Function (The GNU C Library)

None

 Quicksort - Robert Sedgewick

 Chapter 7

Hoare's vs Lomuto partition scheme in QuickSort - GeeksforGeeks

Hoare's vs Lomuto's Partition - algorithm - Stack Overflow

Unstable nature of Lomuto partition scheme

 Engineering a Sort Function - Gallium

sourceware.org Git - glibc.git/blob - stdlib/qsort.c

qsort.c\stdlib\src - musl - musl - an implementation of the standard ...

 A Killer Adversary for Quicksort - Dartmouth Computer Science

qsort.txt - Qualys

Stack overflow always happens when sorting large lists with quicksort

qsort

<stdlib.h>

Quicksort - Algorithms, 4th Edition

 UNIX PROGRAMMER'S MANUAL - Second Edition - Minnie.tuhs.org

 UNIX Programmer's Manual: Third Edition - Free

 Rationale for International Standard - Programming Language - C

Engineering a sort function - Bentley - 1993 - Wiley Online Library

Antiquicksort

 Contents - Open Standards

None

qsort(3) - Linux manual page - man7.org

qsort_r - FreeBSD Manual Pages

qsort_r (GNU Gnulib)

https://man.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=qsort_s

qsort - FreeBSD Manual Pages

Using Blocks - Apple Developer

https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/sort

https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Arrays.html

Sorting Techniques

Quicksort Algorithm: An Overview | Built In

Virtual Memory Behavior of Some Sorting Algorithms

Top 5 Trends in Embedded Systems Development for 2025 - Promwad
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion