Relational model Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Relational model
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 The relational model is a foundational data model in database management systems (DBMS), introduced by IBM researcher Edgar F. Codd in 1970, that organizes data into relationsmathematical sets of tuples (n-ary ordered lists of values from predefined domains)to represent entities and their attributes in a tabular structure of rows and columns, enabling efficient storage, retrieval, and manipulation while promoting logical data independence from physical implementation details. This model draws from set theory and first-order predicate logic, treating data as declarative propositions where associations between entities are captured through shared values rather than explicit links or hierarchies, contrasting with earlier navigational models like CODASYL. At its core, a relation schema defines the attributes and their domains, while instances populate it with tuples adhering to integrity constraints, such as primary keys (unique identifiers for tuples) and foreign keys (references enforcing referential integrity across relations).
Codd's model addresses key challenges in large-scale data banks by ensuring data independence, where modifications to storage structures (e.g., indexing or ordering) do not impact application programs or user queries, and by advocating normal formsstarting with first normal form (1NF), which requires atomic domain valuesto eliminate redundancy and anomalies in updates, insertions, or deletions. Operations on relations are formalized through relational algebra, a procedural query language comprising operators like selection (filtering tuples by predicates), projection (extracting specific attributes), join (combining relations on matching values), union, and difference, which underpin declarative languages such as SQL for querying and ensure query optimization by the DBMS. These features support ACID properties (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability) in transactional processing, making the model suitable for concurrent access in multi-user environments.
The relational model's adoption revolutionized database technology, powering systems like IBM's System R (1970s prototype) and commercial products such as DB2, Oracle, and MySQL, with SQL emerging as the standard interface for its manipulation. Its emphasis on simplicity, flexibility, and mathematical rigor has sustained its dominance despite alternatives like NoSQL, influencing modern data management in applications from business intelligence to scientific computing, while extensions like null values and views address practical complexities in real-world data.

History

Origins and Development

The relational model was introduced by E. F. Codd in his seminal 1970 paper, "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks," published in Communications of the ACM. Working at IBM's San Jose Research Laboratory, Codd proposed the model to overcome the rigidity and complexity of prevailing data management approaches, particularly the hierarchical model exemplified by IBM's Information Management System (IMS) and the network model defined by the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL). These earlier systems required users and applications to navigate predefined pointer-based structures, limiting data independence and complicating maintenance for large-scale shared data banks.
In 1972, Codd further advanced the theoretical foundations with his paper "Relational Completeness of Data Base Sublanguages," which formalized the expressive power of relational query languages by demonstrating their ability to express all first-order predicates on relations. During the 1970s, the model gained traction through research prototypes, notably IBM's System R project, initiated in 1974, which implemented a relational database management system (RDBMS) and developed the Structured English Query Language (SEQUEL), later shortened to SQL. This prototype validated the model's practicality for business data processing, influencing subsequent commercial developments.
Early adoption faced criticisms from proponents of navigational models, who argued that the relational approach sacrificed performance and direct control over data structures for abstraction. To address such concerns and ensure fidelity to the original vision, Codd outlined 12 rules (plus a zeroth rule) in 1985, specifying criteria for a system to qualify as a true RDBMS, emphasizing data independence, integrity, and non-procedural query capabilities. These refinements helped solidify the model's theoretical rigor amid growing implementations. By the mid-1980s, the relational model evolved into formalized standards, with ANSI approving SQL as X3.135 in 1986 and ISO adopting it as 9075 in 1987, establishing a common language for relational database operations.

Key Contributors and Milestones

Edgar F. Codd, a British-born mathematician with a degree from Oxford University, originated the relational model while working as a researcher at the IBM San Jose Research Laboratory in California. In 1981, Codd received the ACM A.M. Turing Award for his "fundamental and lasting contribution to the field of database management" through the invention of the relational model.
A key milestone came in 1974 when IBM developed the Peterlee Relational Test Vehicle (PRTV), the first prototype relational database management system (DBMS), implemented at IBM's UK Scientific Centre using the ISBL query language. In 1979, Relational Software Inc. (later Oracle Corporation) released Oracle Version 2, marking the first commercially available relational DBMS.
Significant contributions to practical implementation included the 1974 development of SEQUEL (Structured English QUEry Language, later renamed SQL due to trademark issues) by Raymond F. Boyce and Donald D. Chamberlin at IBM, which provided a user-friendly query interface for relational databases.
In the 1980s, Codd proposed a set of 12 rules (numbered 0 to 12) to define criteria for a "true" relational DBMS, including Rule 0 (the Foundation Rule, requiring the system to manage data solely through relational means) and Rule 1 (the Information Rule, mandating that all data be stored as values in tables).
Academic influence grew through works like Jeffrey D. Ullman's 1988 textbook Principles of Database and Knowledge-Base Systems, which formalized relational theory and query optimization for broader adoption in education and research.

Core Concepts

Relations, Tuples, and Attributes

In the relational model, a relation is defined as a subset of the Cartesian product of a set of domains, mathematically representing a table structure composed of rows and columns. This formulation ensures that each element in the relation adheres to the predefined domains, providing a structured way to organize data without regard to physical storage details.
A tuple, often visualized as a row in the table, is an ordered list of values where each value corresponds to one domain from the Cartesian product. Each tuple represents a single entity or fact within the relation, such as a complete record of an individual item or relationship.
Attributes correspond to the named columns of the relation, each associated with a specific domain that defines the role and type of data it holds. The name of an attribute conveys the semantic meaning of the column, facilitating user interpretation while the underlying domain enforces the allowable values.
The relation schema specifies the structure of the relation, consisting of the named attributes and their associated domains, whereas the relation instance comprises the actual set of tuples populating the schema at a given time. This distinction allows the schema to remain stable while instances can vary, supporting dynamic data management in large shared data banks.
The cardinality of a relation refers to the number of tuples it contains, indicating the volume of data represented, while the degree denotes the number of attributes, reflecting the relation's complexity or arity.
For illustration, consider a simple relation named Employee with schema (EmpID, Name, Dept), where EmpID is an integer domain for unique identifiers, Name is a string domain for employee names, and Dept is a string domain for department assignments. A sample instance might include the following tuples:
EmpIDNameDept
101AliceSales
102BobIT
103CarolHR
This relation has cardinality 3 and degree 3.

Domains and Values

In the relational model, a domain is defined as a set of atomic values from which the elements of a relation's attributes are drawn, providing the semantic foundation for data types and ensuring type safety by restricting attributes to permissible values. For instance, domains may include sets such as integers, strings, or real numbers, where each domain specifies the pool of allowable entries for an attribute, thereby maintaining consistency and validity across the database.
Atomic values within domains are indivisible data elements that cannot be further decomposed into constituent parts, a requirement essential for adhering to the first normal form (1NF) and preventing nested structures or repeating groups within relations. This atomicity ensures that each position in a tuple holds a single, scalar value, avoiding complex objects like relations embedded within values, which would violate the model's simplicity and query efficiency principles.
The original 1970 relational model represented values exclusively as scalars drawn from their domains, without provision for nulls. Codd later introduced nulls to handle missing or inapplicable information, requiring their systematic treatment independent of data type. Some theorists, such as Date and Darwen, argue that nulls can introduce logical inconsistencies and ambiguity in querying and integrity enforcement, preferring to represent incompleteness through explicit relations. Although practical database systems often include nulls for handling missing information, alternative approaches emphasize explicit modeling.
Domains play a critical role in preventing invalid data by constraining attributes to semantically meaningful values, such as a Date domain that excludes impossible dates like February 30 while permitting only valid calendar entries. This constraint mechanism enforces business rules at the type level, reducing errors and supporting reliable data manipulation.
Unlike attributes, which represent specific roles or properties within a relation (e.g., an employee's salary), domains define the underlying possible values independently, with attributes referencing or being typed over these domains to inherit their constraints. Thus, attributes utilize domains to ensure their values remain within defined bounds, bridging structure and semantics in the model.

Integrity Constraints

Keys and Uniqueness

In the relational model, a superkey is defined as any set of one or more attributes within a relation that can uniquely identify each tuple, ensuring no two distinct tuples share the same values for that set. This includes potentially extraneous attributes, as even the entire set of attributes in a relation qualifies as a superkey by default, since relations inherently contain no duplicate tuples. Superkeys provide a foundational mechanism for uniqueness but may not be minimal, allowing for broader sets that still enforce distinctness.
A candidate key, also known as a key, is a minimal superkey, meaning it uniquely identifies tuples and has no proper subset that also functions as a superkey, eliminating any redundant attributes. Relations can have multiple candidate keys, each offering an irreducible way to distinguish entities; for instance, in a relation tracking vehicles, both the license number and engine serial number might serve as candidate keys if neither can be derived from the other alone. These keys underpin the model's ability to represent unique entities without ambiguity.
From the set of candidate keys, one is selected as the primary key, which becomes the designated identifier for tuples in the relation and is used for indexing, querying, and referencing purposes. The primary key must be non-null and unique, enforcing entity integrity by rejecting any insertion or update that would violate this rule. The remaining candidate keys are termed alternate keys, which retain their uniqueness but are not prioritized for primary operations.
Uniqueness via keys is enforced through constraints in relational database management systems, preventing duplicate values in the key attributes and ensuring the relation remains a set of distinct tuples. For example, consider an Employee relation with attributes such as EmployeeID, Name, SSN, and Department; if SSN is the primary key, inserting two tuples with the same SSN value would violate the constraint, as it would fail to uniquely identify employees and indicate a duplication error. These key mechanisms are grounded in functional dependencies, where attributes in a key functionally determine all others in the relation.

Foreign Keys and Referential Integrity

In the relational model, a foreign key is defined as a domain (or combination of domains) in one relation that is not its primary key but whose values are drawn from the primary key of another relation, thereby establishing a reference between the two. This mechanism allows relations to link semantically without embedding one within another, supporting the model's emphasis on independence among relations.
Referential integrity is the constraint that ensures every non-null value in a foreign key column must match an existing value in the corresponding primary key of the referenced relation. Formally, if $ K $ is a foreign key drawing values from domain $ D $, then "every unmarked value which occurs in $ K $ must also exist in the database as the value of the primary key on domain $ D $ of some base relation." This rule prevents invalid cross-references, maintaining the logical consistency of the database by enforcing that referenced entities exist. In the extended relational model, null valuesrepresented as A-marks (missing but applicable) or prohibited I-marks (missing and inapplicable)are permitted in foreign keys under controlled conditions, but I-marks are forbidden to uphold entity integrity.
When referential integrity is violated, such as during an insert, update, or delete operation, the system responds according to predefined actions specified by the database administrator. Common actions include rejection (refusing the operation to prevent violation), cascading (propagating the change to matching foreign key values, such as updating or deleting dependent tuples), or marking (replacing foreign key values with A-marks where applicable). For instance, deleting a primary key tuple may trigger cascaded deletion of referencing tuples, cascaded marking, or outright rejection, depending on the constraint declaration. These actions are cataloged in the database system, including details on triggering events, timing (e.g., at command or transaction end), and the involved keys.
To illustrate, consider a database with a Customers relation (primary key: CustomerID) and an Orders relation containing a foreign key CustomerID referencing Customers.CustomerID. The following simplified tables show valid data under referential integrity:
CustomersCustomerIDName
101Alice
102Bob
OrdersOrderIDCustomerIDAmount
110150.00
210275.00
Here, all CustomerID values in Orders exist in Customers, satisfying the constraint; an order with CustomerID 103 would violate it unless 103 is added to Customers or handled via an allowed action like marking. (Adapted from standard relational examples in Codd's model.)
The benefits of foreign keys and referential integrity include preventing orphaned records (tuples referencing non-existent entities) and dangling references (invalid links that could lead to inconsistent queries or joins). By enforcing these at the model level, the relational database avoids data anomalies during operations, promoting reliability and semantic accuracy across interconnected relations.

Other Constraints

In the relational model, integrity constraints extend beyond keys to enforce semantic rules that maintain data validity and consistency across relations. These constraints focus on the meaning and quality of data values rather than solely on identification or referential links, ensuring that the database reflects real-world semantics without introducing inconsistencies.
Entity integrity is a fundamental rule stipulating that no component of a primary key in any tuple can contain a null value, guaranteeing that every entity is uniquely and completely identifiable. This prevents incomplete or ambiguous representations of entities, as primary keys are essential for distinguishing rows in a relation. For instance, in a relation representing employees, the employee ID as the primary key must always have a non-null value to ensure each record corresponds to a distinct individual. This rule, formalized in extensions of the relational model, underscores the model's requirement for robust entity representation.
Domain constraints require that all values in an attribute conform to the predefined domain for that attribute, which specifies allowable types, ranges, or formats as established in the core concepts of the relational model. These constraints validate data at the attribute level, such as restricting a "salary" attribute to positive numeric values within a certain range (e.g., 0 < salary 500,000) or limiting a "date" attribute to valid calendar dates. By enforcing domain adherence, the model prevents invalid entries that could compromise query accuracy or business logic, with violations typically checked during insert or update operations.
Check constraints provide a mechanism for user-defined conditions on individual attributes or tuples, allowing finer control over data semantics beyond basic domain rules. For example, a check constraint might enforce that an employee's salary exceeds a minimum threshold (e.g., salary > 30,000) or that a department budget remains positive after updates. These are typically declared at the relation level and evaluated atomically during data modifications to uphold specific business rules, distinguishing them from broader identificatory constraints by targeting value-based validity.
Assertions represent database-wide constraints that span multiple relations, enforcing complex semantic conditions such as aggregate limits or inter-relation dependencies. Unlike attribute-specific checks, assertions are defined independently and checked globally upon any relevant database operation; for instance, an assertion might ensure that the total salary across all employees in a department does not exceed an allocated budget. This capability, integrated into the relational framework through standards like SQL-99, allows for expressive enforcement of enterprise policies while maintaining the model's declarative integrity paradigm. These constraints are semantic in nature, focusing on overall data coherence rather than entity identification.

Relational Operations

Fundamental Operations

The fundamental operations of relational algebra provide the primitive mechanisms for querying and transforming relations in the relational model, enabling the construction of complex queries from basic building blocks. These operations, originally conceptualized by E. F. Codd, treat relations as mathematical sets and ensure that the output of any operation is itself a valid relation. They form the theoretical foundation for database query languages and emphasize declarative data retrieval without specifying access paths.
The selection operation, denoted $ \sigma $, restricts a relation to those tuples satisfying a specified predicate or condition on its attributes. It operates on a single input relation and preserves all attributes while potentially reducing the number of tuples. For example, given an Employee relation with attributes such as Name, Dept, and Salary, the expression $ \sigma_{\text{Dept = 'Sales'}}(\text{Employee}) $ returns only the tuples where the Dept attribute equals 'Sales', effectively filtering the data based on departmental affiliation. This operation is crucial for conditional retrieval and corresponds to the logical restriction in set theory.
The projection operation, denoted $ \pi $, extracts a specified subset of attributes from a relation, automatically eliminating any duplicate tuples to maintain the relation's set semantics. It takes one input relation and outputs a new relation with fewer attributes but potentially fewer tuples due to deduplication. For instance, $ \pi_{\text{Name, Dept}}(\text{Employee}) $ selects only the Name and Dept columns from the Employee relation, discarding other attributes like Salary and removing any rows that are identical in these projected columns. Projection supports data summarization and is essential for hiding irrelevant details while ensuring no information loss in the selected attributes.
The Cartesian product, denoted $ \times $, combines two relations by concatenating every tuple from the first with every tuple from the second, yielding a new relation whose attributes are the union of the inputs and whose tuples represent all possible pairwise combinations. If the first relation has $ m $ tuples and the second has $ n $, the result has $ m \times n $ tuples and degree equal to the sum of the input degrees. This operation, while potentially computationally expensive for large relations, underpins relational composition and allows unrestricted cross-matching of data from independent tables.
For relations that are union-compatiblesharing the same degree and corresponding attribute domainsthe model incorporates standard set operations. The union, denoted $ \cup $, produces a relation containing all distinct tuples from either input, merging datasets while avoiding redundancy. The intersection, denoted $ \cap $, yields only the tuples common to both inputs, identifying overlapping data. The difference, denoted $ - $, returns tuples present in the first relation but absent from the second, enabling subtraction of one dataset from another. These operations extend set theory to relations, supporting aggregation, comparison, and filtering of compatible tables without altering attribute structures.
Relational completeness characterizes the expressive power of these fundamental operations, asserting that relational algebra can formulate any query expressible in domain-independent first-order predicate calculus over relations. Codd defined completeness as the ability to replicate all "alpha" expressionsbasic logical queries on finite relationsusing a finite combination of the primitives, proven through an algorithmic translation from calculus to algebra. This property ensures the model's sufficiency for general-purpose data manipulation, influencing the design of query languages like SQL and guaranteeing theoretical robustness for relational databases.

Derived Operations

In the relational model, derived operations are composite procedures constructed from fundamental relational algebra primitives, such as selection (\sigma), projection (\pi), and Cartesian product (\times), to facilitate more complex data retrieval and manipulation tasks. These operations enable efficient querying without requiring users to explicitly compose basic steps, promoting both conceptual simplicity and practical utility in database systems. As outlined in the foundational work on relational algebra, such derived operations extend the model's expressive power while maintaining a set-theoretic basis.
The join operation, denoted by \Join, combines tuples from two relations based on a matching condition, typically equality on shared attributes. It is formally defined as the Cartesian product of the two relations followed by a selection on the join predicate, yielding only tuples where the condition holds; for natural join, the predicate equates all common attributes, eliminating duplicate columns in the result. This operation is essential for relating data across tables, as introduced by Codd to model associations like linking employee records to department details. For instance, a natural join on the DeptID attribute merges an Employee relation (with attributes EmployeeID, Name, DeptID) and a Department relation (with attributes DeptID, DeptName), producing a result with EmployeeID, Name, DeptID, and DeptName only for matching DeptID values.
The theta join, denoted \Join_{\theta}, generalizes the join by allowing an arbitrary condition \theta (beyond simple equality), such as inequalities or complex comparisons across any attributes. It is computed as (RS)\sigma_{\theta}(R \times S)(RS), where RRR and SSS are the input relations, providing flexibility for non-equality-based associations in queries. This variant supports broader analytical tasks, like finding employees in departments with budgets exceeding a threshold, while inheriting the efficiency optimizations of standard joins.
The division operation, denoted \div, identifies values in one relation that are associated with all values in another relation, effectively reversing universal quantification over sets. For relations R(A,B)R(A, B)R(A,B) and S(B)S(B)S(B), RSR \div SRS returns the subset of AAA values in RRR paired with every BBB value in SSS; it can be expressed using complement, projection, and join from primitives, though often implemented directly for performance. A classic example is determining suppliers who provide all required parts: given a Supplies relation (SupplierID, PartID) and a Parts relation (PartID), the division yields SupplierIDs associated with every PartID, useful for procurement analysis.
The rename operation, denoted \rho, reassigns names to a relation or its attributes to enhance clarity, resolve naming conflicts during composition, or facilitate reuse in expressions. Applied as T(R)\rho_{T}(R)T(R) to rename relation RRR to TTT, or AB(R)\rho_{A \leftarrow B}(R)AB(R) to rename attribute AAA to BBB in RRR, it does not alter data but prepares relations for subsequent operations like joins on similarly named fields. This utility is crucial in multi-relation queries, ensuring unambiguous attribute references without data modification.

Database Normalization

Normal Forms

Normal forms in the relational model constitute a series of progressively stricter criteria for organizing relations to minimize data redundancies and prevent update, insertion, and deletion anomalies. Introduced by Edgar F. Codd, these forms build upon each other, starting from the foundational First Normal Form (1NF) and extending to higher levels that address more complex dependencies.
A relation is in First Normal Form (1NF) if all its attribute values are atomicthat is, indivisibleand there are no repeating groups or arrays within tuples. This ensures that each attribute holds a single value from its domain, eliminating multivalued attributes and enabling the relation to be represented as a proper mathematical set of tuples. 1NF serves as the baseline for all higher normal forms, as it aligns the relational structure with set theory principles.
Second Normal Form (2NF) requires a relation to be in 1NF and have no partial dependencies, meaning every non-prime attribute is fully functionally dependent on the entire candidate key, not just a subset of a composite key. This eliminates redundancy arising from partial dependencies, particularly in relations with compound primary keys. Functional dependencies, which specify how attribute values determine others, underpin this condition.
Third Normal Form (3NF) builds on 2NF by additionally prohibiting transitive dependencies, where a non-prime attribute depends on another non-prime attribute rather than directly on a candidate key. In 3NF, every non-prime attribute must depend only on candidate keys, further reducing redundancy and dependency chains that could lead to anomalies.
Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF) strengthens 3NF by requiring that for every functional dependency, the determinant is a candidate key; thus, no non-trivial dependency holds where the left side is not a superkey. This addresses cases in 3NF where overlapping candidate keys can still cause anomalies, making BCNF a stricter variant often preferred for its elimination of all non-trivial dependencies not involving candidate keys.
Higher normal forms extend these principles to handle more advanced dependencies. Fourth Normal Form (4NF), introduced by Ronald Fagin in 1977, requires a relation to be in BCNF and free of non-trivial multivalued dependencies, preventing redundancies from independent multi-valued facts about an entity. Fifth Normal Form (5NF), also known as Project-Join Normal Form (PJ/NF) and introduced by Edgar F. Codd in 1979, ensures no non-trivial join dependencies exist beyond those implied by candidate keys, eliminating the need for decomposition to avoid spurious tuples upon joins. These forms target independence of attribute sets to maintain lossless decompositions.
While higher normal forms like BCNF, 4NF, and 5NF more effectively eliminate anomalies and redundancies, they can result in greater relation fragmentation, potentially increasing the number of joins required for queries and thus impacting performance in practical systems. This trade-off necessitates balancing normalization levels against application-specific needs for efficiency and query complexity.

Normalization Process

The normalization process in the relational model involves systematically decomposing relations to eliminate redundancies and anomalies while preserving data integrity. Two primary algorithmic approaches are used: the synthesis algorithm, which builds normalized relations from a set of functional dependencies, and the decomposition algorithm, which breaks down existing relations into higher normal forms. These methods ensure that the resulting schema supports lossless joinsmeaning the original relation can be reconstructed without spurious tuplesand preserves dependencies, allowing enforcement of all original functional dependencies locally within the decomposed relations.
The synthesis algorithm, proposed by Bernstein, starts with a set of functional dependencies and constructs a schema in third normal form (3NF) by grouping attributes based on dependency implications. The steps are as follows: first, compute a minimal cover of the functional dependencies by removing extraneous attributes and redundant dependencies; second, partition the minimal cover into groups where each group shares the same left-hand side attributes; third, for each group, create a relation consisting of the left-hand side attributes plus all attributes dependent on them from the right-hand sides in that group; fourth, if no relation contains a superkey of the original relation, add a new relation with that superkey and any necessary attributes to ensure lossless decomposition. This approach produces a minimal number of relations that are dependency-preserving and lossless.
In contrast, the decomposition algorithm applies a top-down strategy to an existing relation that violates a target normal form, iteratively refining it until compliance is achieved. For achieving 3NF, the process begins by identifying a minimal cover of functional dependencies; then, for each dependency X A in the cover where A is not part of any candidate key, decompose the relation into two: one with attributes X {A} (and its key), and another with the remaining attributes, projecting the dependencies accordingly; repeat until no violations remain. This guarantees a dependency-preserving and lossless decomposition into 3NF, as every relation admits such a decomposition.
Before applying these algorithms, designers test for anomalies in unnormalized or partially normalized relations to justify decomposition. Insertion anomalies occur when adding new data requires extraneous information, such as being unable to record a new department without assigning an employee to it. Deletion anomalies arise when removing a tuple eliminates unrelated data, like losing department details upon deleting the last employee record. Update anomalies happen when modifying one attribute necessitates changes across multiple tuples to maintain consistency, risking partial updates and inconsistencies. These issues stem from transitive or partial dependencies and are identified by examining how operations affect data integrity.
Consider an example of decomposing a relation not in second normal form (2NF). Suppose a relation ProjectAssign (ProjID, EmpID, EmpName, ProjBudget, DeptLoc) with candidate key (ProjID, EmpID) and functional dependencies ProjID ProjBudget, EmpID EmpName, and EmpID DeptLoc. The partial dependency EmpID DeptLoc violates 2NF, as DeptLoc depends only on part of the key. To decompose: first, create Employee (EmpID, EmpName, DeptLoc) with key EmpID, projecting dependencies involving EmpID; second, retain ProjectAssign (ProjID, EmpID, ProjBudget) with key (ProjID, EmpID), removing DeptLoc. This eliminates the partial dependency, resolves anomalies (e.g., no update anomaly for changing an employee's department location), and ensures lossless join via the common EmpID attribute. The result is in 2NF, and further steps can apply to reach 3NF if needed.
In practice, after normalization, denormalization may be intentionally applied to reverse some decomposition for performance gains, particularly in read-heavy systems where join operations are costly. This involves reintroducing controlled redundancies, such as duplicating attributes across relations to reduce query complexity, while monitoring for reintroduced anomalies. Denormalization can improve query response times in certain workloads, but it requires careful trade-offs to avoid excessive storage overhead and maintenance issues.

Formal Foundations

Set-Theoretic Basis

The relational model is grounded in set theory, where a relation is formally defined as a finite set of tuples over a given schema. A relation schema, also known as the heading, consists of a finite set of attribute-domain pairs, where each attribute is associated with a specific domain representing the set of allowable values for that attribute. The body of the relation is the finite set of tuples that satisfy this schema, ensuring that the relation represents a subset of all possible combinations of values from the domains.
Each tuple in the relation is a function that maps attributes from the heading to values within their respective domains, providing a named perspective on the data that avoids positional dependencies. Formally, for a schema $ S $ consisting of attributes $ A_1, A_2, \dots, A_n $ with domains $ \dom(A_1), \dom(A_2), \dots, \dom(A_n) $, a tuple $ t $ satisfies $ t(A_i) \in \dom(A_i) $ for each $ i $. The relation $ R $ over schema $ S $ is then $ R \subseteq \prod_{A \in S} \dom(A) $, where the Cartesian product $ \prod_{A \in S} \dom(A) $ denotes the set of all such functions, and the projection $ \Pi_S $ ensures alignment with the attribute names in $ S $. This construction builds on the Cartesian product operation, defined for two sets $ X $ and $ Y $ as $ X \times Y = { (x, y) \mid x \in X, y \in Y } $, which extends to multiple domains as the foundation for possible tuples.
Key properties of relations stem directly from their set-theoretic nature: tuples are unordered, meaning the sequence of elements in the relation has no significance, and there are no duplicate tuples, as sets inherently exclude repetitions. These properties ensure that relations are mathematical sets without inherent ordering or multiplicity, distinguishing the model from array-like or list-based structures. Relational operations, such as selection and join, can thus be viewed as manipulations of these sets, preserving the foundational mathematical integrity.

Functional Dependencies and Keys

In the relational model, a functional dependency (FD) is a constraint that exists between two sets of attributes in a relation, denoted as $ X \to Y $, where $ X $ and $ Y $ are subsets of the relation's attributes. This means that if two tuples in the relation have the same values for all attributes in $ X $, they must also have the same values for all attributes in $ Y $. Formally, for a relation $ R $, $ X \to Y $ holds if the projection $ \pi_{X,Y}(R) $ ensures that each $ X $-value maps to at most one $ Y $-value. Trivial functional dependencies occur when $ Y \subseteq X $, as they always hold regardless of the data.
Functional dependencies capture semantic relationships within the data and form the basis for inferring additional dependencies from a given set. The closure of a set of FDs, denoted $ F^+ $, is the set of all FDs logically implied by $ F $. This closure is computed using a sound and complete set of inference rules known as Armstrong's axioms. The three primary axioms are:

Reflexivity: If $ Y \subseteq X $, then $ X \to Y $.

Augmentation: If $ X \to Y $, then for any $ Z $, $ XZ \to YZ $.

Transitivity: If $ X \to Y $ and $ Y \to Z $, then $ X \to Z $.

These axioms allow derivation of all implied FDs without redundancy.
Candidate keys are minimal sets of attributes that functionally determine all other attributes in the relation, ensuring uniqueness for each tuple. A superkey is any set whose closure includes all attributes, while a candidate key is a minimal superkeyno proper subset is also a superkey. To derive candidate keys from a set of FDs $ F $ over attributes $ U $, an algorithm computes attribute closures and identifies minimal determinants:

List all given FDs in $ F $.

Compute the closure of each individual attribute (or small subset) using Armstrong's axioms to find attributes that must be included in any key (essential attributes).

Generate potential superkeys by starting with essential attributes and adding others whose closures do not fully cover $ U $ without them.

Test minimality by checking if removing any attribute from a superkey still yields a closure of $ U $; retain only the minimal sets as candidate keys.

This process ensures all candidate keys are found efficiently by leveraging FD implications.
For example, consider a relation schema $ R(A, B, C) $ with FDs $ A \to B $ and $ B \to C $. By transitivity, $ A \to C $ holds in the closure. The closure of $ {A} $ is $ {A, B, C} $, covering all attributes, and no proper subset works, so $ {A} $ is the sole candidate key.

Practical Interpretations

Logical Model Example

To illustrate the logical structure of the relational model, consider an abstract university schema consisting of three relations: Course with attributes CourseID and Title; Student with attributes SID and Name; and Enrollment with attributes SID and CourseID. The CourseID in Enrollment serves as a foreign key referencing Course, while SID in Enrollment references Student, enforcing referential integrity at the logical level.
In this logical interpretation, each relation functions as a predicate, and each tuple represents a specific instantiation of that predicate, asserting a true fact about the domain. For instance, the tuple Enrollment(S1, C101) indicates that student S1 is enrolled in course C101, while Student(S1, "Alice") states that S1's name is Alice, and Course(C101, "Database Systems") specifies the course title. This predicate-based view allows the relations to capture declarative facts without concern for physical storage or access paths, emphasizing the model's data independence.
A query in relational algebra can express retrieval declaratively, focusing on the desired facts rather than procedural steps. To find the names of students enrolled in course C101, the expression is Name(CourseID=C101(Enrollment(/page/Student)))\pi_{\text{Name}} \left( \sigma_{\text{CourseID = 'C101'}} \left( \text{Enrollment} \bowtie \text{(/page/Student)} \right) \right)Name(CourseID=C101(Enrollment(/page/Student))), where \bowtie denotes the natural join on matching SID attributes, \sigma selects tuples satisfying the condition, and \pi projects the Name attribute, eliminating duplicates. This composition highlights the model's algebraic foundation for manipulating relations as sets of facts.
The declarative nature of this logical model underscores that users specify what information is neededsuch as the set of student names for a given coursewithout detailing how the system retrieves or stores the data, enabling optimizations at the physical layer while preserving semantic consistency.
RelationAttributesExample Tuple
CourseCourseID, Title(C101, "Database Systems")
StudentSID, Name(S1, "Alice")
EnrollmentSID, CourseID(S1, C101)

Real-World Database Example

A real-world application of the relational model can be seen in an e-commerce system managing customer purchases, where data is organized into relations to capture entities and their relationships efficiently. Consider a database schema consisting of three primary relations: Customers, Orders, and Products. The Customers relation stores customer details with attributes CustID (primary key), Name, and City. The Orders relation records purchase transactions with attributes OrderID (primary key), CustID (foreign key referencing Customers.CustID), Date, and Amount (total order value). The Products relation holds product information with attributes ProdID (primary key) and Name. This structure enforces referential integrity through foreign keys, ensuring that each order links to a valid customer.
To illustrate relationships, the one-to-many association between customers and orders allows a single customer to place multiple orders, while the Products relation can be linked via an additional OrderItems relation if line-level details are needed (e.g., OrderItems with OrderID and ProdID as composite primary key, plus Quantity and Price). However, for simplicity in this example, the Orders relation aggregates product totals into Amount, assuming basic order summarization. Primary keys uniquely identify tuples, and the foreign key in Orders prevents orphaned records, such as orders without corresponding customers.
This schema adheres to normalization principles, achieving at least third normal form (3NF) by eliminating transitive dependencies. For instance, if customer addresses were included in Customers (e.g., adding Street and ZipCode), City might depend transitively on Street; to resolve this, a separate Addresses relation could be introduced with AddressID as primary key, Street, City, and ZipCode, referenced by CustID. In the given schema without addresses, attributes directly depend on the primary key without redundancy, avoiding update anomalies like inconsistent city updates across customer records.
A practical query in this database might compute the total order amount by city, demonstrating relational operations. Using relational algebra, this involves joining Orders with Customers on CustID, projecting City and Amount, grouping by City, and summing Amountthough grouping and aggregation extend the pure relational model beyond basic operators like join and projection. For example, the result could show totals such as Harrison: $5000, Rye: $3000, reflecting business insights into regional sales. This avoids insertion anomalies (e.g., adding a product without an order) and deletion anomalies (e.g., deleting a customer only cascades if no open orders exist, preserving history via foreign key constraints).

Applications and Implementations

Relational Database Systems

Relational database management systems (RDBMS) implement the relational model through a combination of software components that handle data storage, querying, and transaction processing. The core architecture typically includes a storage manager, which interfaces with the operating system to manage physical data files, buffers, and indices for efficient storage and retrieval; a query processor, responsible for parsing, optimizing, and executing queries; and a transaction manager, which ensures concurrent access and recovery from failures. These components collectively support the ACID propertiesAtomicity (transactions complete fully or not at all), Consistency (data adheres to integrity constraints), Isolation (concurrent transactions do not interfere), and Durability (committed changes persist despite failures)to maintain data reliability in multi-user environments.
In RDBMS, the relational model's abstract concepts map directly to physical storage structures: relations are implemented as tables, tuples as rows within those tables, and attributes as columns with defined data types and constraints. This mapping enables straightforward data organization while preserving logical independence, where schema changes do not affect application code accessing the data. For performance enhancement, RDBMS employ indexes on keys, such as primary or foreign keys, which create auxiliary data structures (e.g., B-trees) to accelerate search and join operations by avoiding full table scans. Views, defined as virtual relations derived from one or more base tables via queries, provide a layer of abstraction for security and simplification without duplicating storage. SQL serves as the primary interface for defining and manipulating these structures.
The evolution of RDBMS began with pioneering research prototypes in the 1970s, notably IBM's System R project (19731979), which demonstrated the feasibility of a relational system supporting multi-user access, query optimization, and recovery mechanisms like logging and locking. System R introduced a cost-based query optimizer and compiled SQL execution, influencing the development of commercial products such as IBM's DB2 in 1983. Subsequent advancements expanded RDBMS to diverse platforms, including parallel processing and distributed environments, leading to widespread adoption in enterprise applications. Modern open-source RDBMS like PostgreSQL and MySQL exemplify this maturity: PostgreSQL offers advanced features such as multi-version concurrency control (MVCC), parallel query execution, and extensive indexing options (e.g., B-tree, GIN) for handling terabyte-scale data with full ACID compliance; MySQL provides high-performance storage engines (e.g., InnoDB) optimized for read-heavy workloads and replication for scalability.
Despite these achievements, RDBMS face scalability challenges, particularly in horizontal distribution across clusters, due to the overhead of maintaining ACID guarantees and distributed transaction coordination, often leading to bottlenecks in high-throughput scenarios. Vertical scaling via increased hardware resources provides temporary relief but hits limits in cloud environments with fluctuating loads. These issues have prompted extensions like sharding and NewSQL architectures to address big data demands while retaining relational principles.

SQL and the Relational Model

SQL, as a declarative language, provides mechanisms to define and manipulate relational structures, aligning with the relational model's emphasis on tables as relations. The CREATE TABLE statement establishes a table schema by specifying column names, data types, and constraints, effectively defining a relation with its attributes and domains. For instance, a basic CREATE TABLE command might define a relation for employees as follows:
CREATE TABLE Employees (
 EmpID INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
 Name VARCHAR(50),
 DeptID INTEGER
);
This corresponds to the relational model's requirement for typed domains and keys to ensure data integrity. The INSERT statement populates the relation by adding tuples, such as INSERT INTO Employees VALUES (1, 'Alice', 10);, which inserts a new row as a tuple in the set. Meanwhile, the SELECT statement implements relational algebra operations for querying, enabling retrieval and transformation of data from one or more relations.
A core mapping between SQL and the relational model occurs in the SELECT-FROM-WHERE construct, which translates to fundamental relational algebra operations. The FROM clause implies a cross-product (Cartesian join) of specified relations, the WHERE clause applies selection () to filter tuples based on predicates, and the SELECT clause performs projection () to retrieve specific attributes. For example, the SQL query SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S, Reserves R WHERE S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid = 103; equates to the relational algebra expression _{sname} (_{S.sid = R.sid R.bid = 103} (Sailors Reserves)), combining join, selection, and projection to produce a new relation. SQL's PRIMARY KEY and FOREIGN KEY constraints further enforce relational integrity by defining unique identifiers and referential dependencies, respectively, ensuring no duplicate keys and valid cross-relation links.
Despite these alignments, SQL deviates from the pure relational model in several ways, introducing practical features that compromise theoretical purity. Null values in SQL represent missing or inapplicable information but lead to three-valued logic (true, false, unknown) in comparisons, diverging from the relational model's two-valued (boolean) logic and potentially causing unpredictable query results. SQL tables function as multisets (bags), permitting duplicate tuples, which violates the set-based nature of relations where duplicates are inherently prohibited. Additionally, the ORDER BY clause imposes a specific sequence on output, contradicting the relational model's stipulation that relations are unordered sets.
E.F. Codd critiqued SQL for failing to fully adhere to his 12 rules for relational database systems, particularly Rule 5, the comprehensive data sublanguage rule, which requires a language supporting both interactive and embedded modes for all data operations with linear syntax. ANSI SQL at the time lacked full dynamic SQL capabilities and catalog access, limiting its completeness as a relational query language. Codd also noted SQL's inadequate enforcement of structural rules, such as allowing duplicates and insufficient domain support, which undermine guaranteed access (Rule 2) and integrity constraints. These issues, in Codd's view, made SQL a flawed implementation despite its widespread adoption.
The evolution of SQL standards has addressed some limitations while extending beyond the strict relational model. SQL:1999 (also known as SQL3) introduced recursive queries via common table expressions (CTEs), enabling traversal of hierarchical data like bill-of-materials, as in WITH RECURSIVE Q1 AS (SELECT ...), Q2 AS (SELECT ... FROM Q1 ...) SELECT ... FROM Q2;, which supports transitive closures not native to basic relational algebra. It also added analytic functions for windowed aggregations, such as ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY ...), facilitating complex computations like ranking over partitions. These enhancements, along with support for structured types like arrays, broaden SQL's applicability but introduce non-scalar elements that challenge first normal form.

Extensions and Alternatives

Model Extensions

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, E. F. Codd extended the relational model to address the limitations of handling missing or incomplete information, introducing a framework that distinguishes between different types of null values. Specifically, Codd proposed two primary interpretations of nulls: "applicable but unknown" (A-null), representing data that should exist but is currently unavailable, and "inapplicable" (I-null), indicating that the attribute does not apply to the tuple. This distinction aimed to prevent ambiguities in queries and updates, potentially requiring a four-valued logic (true, false, A-null, I-null) for relational operations. To make the approach more practical, Codd advocated for a three-valued logic (true, false, unknown) in implementations, where nulls are treated uniformly but with careful semantics to avoid information loss during joins or projections. These extensions were formalized in Codd's 1990 work, emphasizing that a fully relational system must systematically manage missing information without compromising data integrity.
Building on the pure relational model, object-relational extensions emerged in the 1990s to incorporate object-oriented features like complex data types and inheritance, enabling the representation of hierarchical or structured entities within relations. The SQL:1999 standard (ISO/IEC 9075:1999) introduced structured user-defined types (UDTs), which allow users to define composite types with attributes and methods, akin to classes in object-oriented programming. These UDTs support encapsulation, polymorphism, and inheritance hierarchies, where subtypes can inherit attributes and behaviors from supertypes, facilitating the modeling of real-world objects such as geometric shapes or multimedia components. For instance, a UDT for "Person" could be extended to "Employee" with additional attributes like salary, while methods like "calculateAge()" could be defined and inherited. This integration preserves relational principles like normalization and declarative querying while adding support for complex types, as implemented in systems like PostgreSQL and Oracle. Such features addressed the need for richer data modeling without abandoning the relational foundation, though adoption varied due to complexity in query optimization.
Temporal extensions to the relational model provide mechanisms for managing time-dependent data, distinguishing between valid timethe period during which a fact is true in the real worldand transaction timethe interval when the fact is stored and modifiable in the database. Valid-time relations associate tuples with time intervals (e.g., start and end timestamps) to track when data holds true, enabling queries like "What was the employee's salary during 2020?" Transaction-time relations, conversely, record the database's history of changes, supporting audits such as "When was this salary updated?" Bitemporal relations combine both, capturing full lifecycles for applications like financial records or legal compliance. These concepts were formalized in the 1990s through works like the TSQL2 proposal, which extended SQL with temporal operators (e.g., AS OF, BETWEEN) and predicates for temporal reasoning, ensuring compatibility with core relational algebra while adding time as a first-class dimension. The approach maintains first normal form but augments schemas with temporal attributes, allowing efficient storage via interval encoding and indexing. Standardization efforts culminated in SQL:2011's partial support for temporal features, influencing modern systems like SQL Server's system-versioned tables.
Nested relations represent a deviation from the strict first normal form (1NF) requirement of atomic values, permitting relations or sets as attribute values to model complex, hierarchical structures like semistructured data. Introduced in the early 1980s, this extension allows tuples to contain nested tables, enabling compact representation of one-to-many relationships without excessive joinsfor example, a "Document" relation might include a nested "AuthorList" attribute holding multiple authors as a set. The nested relational algebra extends standard operations (e.g., nest and unnest) to handle varying depths, preserving closure while supporting queries on inner relations via path expressions. This model proved useful for semistructured data, such as XML documents or JSON-like trees, where flat normalization would lead to redundancy or loss of structure. Query languages like SQL/NF (Non-First Normal Form) were developed to manipulate nested data declaratively, with normalization theories adapted to minimize redundancy through nested normal forms (e.g., NN1, NN2). Though not universally adopted in commercial RDBMS due to optimization challenges, nested relations influenced hybrid systems for irregular data, bridging relational rigor with flexibility.
Post-2010 developments have further extended the relational model by integrating support for semi-structured formats like JSON and XML directly into SQL, providing NoSQL-like flexibility within relational systems. The SQL:2016 standard (ISO/IEC 9075:2016) introduced native JSON data types and functions (e.g., JSON_VALUE, JSON_QUERY) for storing, querying, and manipulating JSON documents in columns, allowing relations to hold schemaless substructures while maintaining ACID properties. Similarly, SQL/XML (from SQL:2003) enables XML storage and XQuery integration, with functions like XMLSERIALIZE for bidirectional mapping between relational tuples and XML trees. These features support hybrid querying, such as extracting nested JSON paths with dot notation or validating against schemas, as seen in PostgreSQL's JSONB type with GIN indexing for efficient searches. The SQL:2023 standard (ISO/IEC 9075:2023) built on this with enhanced JSON capabilities, including JSON_TABLE for converting JSON to relational tables, and added support for property graph queries, allowing graph-based operations within SQL for modeling complex relationships. By treating JSON/XML as first-class values, the model accommodates web-scale, variable-schema data without full schema redesign, enhancing interoperability with document stores while leveraging relational strengths like joins across structured and unstructured parts. This evolution reflects the model's adaptability to big data needs, with implementations in major DBMS reducing the impedance mismatch between relational and semi-structured paradigms.

Alternative Data Models

The hierarchical database model organizes data in a tree-like structure, where each child record has a single parent, facilitating navigation through parent-child relationships but struggling with many-to-many associations. Developed by IBM in 1968 and implemented in the Information Management System (IMS), this model excels in representing containment hierarchies, such as organizational charts or file systems, due to its simplicity in construction and operation. However, it requires record replication for complex queries, leading to data redundancy and maintenance challenges, and its navigational, procedural access limits query flexibility compared to the relational model's declarative queries and normalization benefits.
The network database model extends the hierarchical approach by allowing many-to-many relationships through a graph-like structure of records and sets, as standardized by CODASYL in the 1970s and implemented in systems like IDMS. This enables modeling of complex interdependencies, such as in supply chain networks, with navigational languages (e.g., FIND and GET commands) that support efficient traversal and semantic handling of additions or deletions. Despite its flexibility for medium-sized datasets, the model suffers from intricate pointer management, procedural navigation that hinders data independence, and limited automated optimization, making it more cumbersome than relational databases for ad-hoc querying.
The entity-relationship (ER) model, introduced by Peter Chen in 1976, serves as a high-level conceptual framework for database design, depicting entities, relationships, and attributes via diagrams to capture real-world semantics before implementation. Unlike the relational model, which focuses on tables and data independence, the ER model emphasizes unification across paradigms by mapping entities to relations and relationships to keys, preserving details like cardinality (e.g., 1:n or m:n) that might be obscured in pure relational schemas. It is not a storage model but a precursor often converted to relational structures, trading some implementation efficiency for clearer semantic representation, and is preferred in early design phases over direct relational modeling for its intuitive visualization of complex associations.
NoSQL databases emerged in the late 2000s to address scalability limitations in relational systems for big data, prioritizing availability and partition tolerance over strict ACID compliance via the CAP theorem. Document-oriented models, such as MongoDB, store semi-structured data in JSON-like BSON documents, offering schema flexibility and horizontal scaling through sharding for applications like content management, though they require application-level logic for consistency in transactions. Key-value stores like Redis provide ultra-fast, simple retrieval for caching or session data, excelling in high-throughput read-heavy workloads with easy distribution, but lack advanced querying and native durability, making them unsuitable for complex joins. Graph databases, exemplified by Neo4j, optimize for relationship traversal in social networks or recommendation engines, scaling well for interconnected data but often forgoing full ACID support, which favors them over relational models when query performance on links outweighs transactional integrity.
Hybrid approaches like NewSQL systems combine the relational model's ACID guarantees and SQL interface with NoSQL-inspired distributed scalability, using techniques such as multi-version concurrency control (MVCC) and sharding to handle online transaction processing (OLTP) at scale. CockroachDB, launched in 2015, exemplifies this by providing geo-distributed SQL with strong consistency via a transactional key-value foundation, suitable for cloud-native applications needing both reliability and horizontal growth. These systems mitigate NoSQL's consistency trade-offs while addressing relational bottlenecks in massive clusters, though they demand expertise in distributed architectures and have slower ecosystem maturity.

References

 A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks

 Lecture Notes - 01 Relational Model & Algebra - CMU 15-445/645

What is a Relational Database? - IBM

A relational model of data for large shared data banks

6 The Rise of Relational Databases | Funding a Revolution

 Relational Completeness of Data Base Sublanguages

The relational database - IBM

System R: relational approach to database management

Codd's 12 Rules - Computerworld

 database language - SQL - NIST Technical Series Publications

ISO 9075:1987 - Database language SQL

Edgar F. Codd - A.M. Turing Award Laureate

IBM Relational Database Systems: The Early Years - ResearchGate

History of SQL

SEQUEL: A structured English query language - ACM Digital Library

Codd's Twelve Rules - Simple Talk - Redgate Software

 principles of database and knowledge -base systems volume i

 The Third Manifesto - DCS - Department of Computer Science

 How To Handle Missing Information Without Using NULL

 A Comparison of Object-Relational and Relational Databases

 Fundamentals of Database Systems

A relational model of data for large shared data banks

 The relational model for database management - CodeBlab

None

 Database Fundamentals - Getting Started with DB2 Express-C - IBM

Relational Algebra - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

 3. Relational Model and Relational Algebra

 Further Normalization of the Data Base Relational Model

 Reflections on Boyce-Codd Normal Form

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/320493.320489

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/926306

 Foundations of Databases - Dronacharya College of Engineering

Finding Candidate Keys for Relational Data Bases

Appendix A University Registration Data Model Example

Relational Database Design

 Chapter 7: Relational Database Design - db-book

The Misconception of Relational Database and the ACID Properties

PostgreSQL: About

MySQL :: MySQL 8.0 Reference Manual :: 1.2.1 What is MySQL?

 A History and Evaluation of System R

 Database Scalability, Elasticity, and Autonomy in the Cloud

CREATE TABLE - IBM

 Relational Algebra and SQL - Cornell: Computer Science

4. No Duplicates, No Nulls - SQL and Relational Theory 

Does your DBMS run by the rules? - The Thaumatorium

 SQL:1999, formerly known as SQL3

The relational model for database management: version 2

 Lecture 2 - CSC4480: Principles of Database Systems

 The entity-relationship model : toward a unified view of data

 The Definitive Guide to NoSQL Databases

 What's Really New with NewSQL? - CMU Database Group
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion