Relational database Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 30 days ago 
Relational database
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A relational database is a type of database management system that organizes data into structured tables composed of rows and columns, where each row represents a record (or tuple) and each column represents an attribute, enabling the establishment of relationships between data points across tables through keys. This model ensures data integrity, consistency, and efficient retrieval by adhering to principles such as normalization to minimize redundancy and anomalies.
The relational model was first proposed by IBM researcher Edgar F. Codd in his seminal 1970 paper, "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks", which introduced the concept of representing data as mathematical relations to simplify querying and maintenance in large-scale systems. Codd's framework shifted away from earlier hierarchical and network models, emphasizing declarative querying over procedural navigation, which laid the groundwork for modern database technology.
Key features of relational databases include the use of primary keys to uniquely identify rows within a table and foreign keys to link tables, enforcing referential integrity and supporting complex joins for data analysis. They are typically managed by a relational database management system (RDBMS), such as traditional RDBMS like IBM DB2, Oracle Database, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and managed cloud services like Amazon RDS (AWS) and Google Cloud SQL, which provide tools for data definition, manipulation, and control.
The adoption of relational databases accelerated in the late 1970s and 1980s, with IBM's System R serving as an influential prototype that demonstrated practical implementation, leading to the first commercial RDBMS releases, including Oracle's product in 1979. Today, relational databases remain foundational for applications requiring ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) compliance, such as transaction processing in finance, e-commerce, and enterprise resource planning, handling vast datasets while supporting scalability through features like indexing and partitioning.

Overview

Definition and Principles

A relational database is a type of database management system that organizes data into relations, which are tabular structures consisting of rows (tuples) and columns (attributes), adhering to the relational model introduced by Edgar F. Codd in 1970. This model represents data as sets of relations where each relation captures entities and their associations through shared attributes, enabling efficient storage, retrieval, and manipulation without reliance on physical storage details or navigational paths.
The foundational principles of relational databases emphasize data independence, integrity, and declarative querying. Logical data independence ensures that changes to the conceptual schema, such as adding new relations, do not affect application programs, while physical data independence shields users from alterations in storage structures or access methods. Data integrity is enforced through constraints like primary keys, which uniquely identify each tuple in a relation, and referential integrity rules that maintain consistency across relations. Querying relies on set-based operationssuch as selection, projection, and joinwhich treat data as mathematical sets, allowing users to specify what data is needed without detailing how to retrieve it.
In contrast to earlier hierarchical and network models, which organize data in tree-like or graph structures requiring explicit navigation along predefined paths, the relational model uses a flat, tabular format that promotes simplicity and flexibility. Hierarchical models limit relationships to parent-child hierarchies, while network models (like CODASYL) allow more complex linkages but often lead to access dependencies and redundancy; the relational approach avoids these by providing a declarative, high-level interface that abstracts away implementation details.

Applications and Advantages

Relational databases find extensive application across diverse sectors due to their ability to manage structured data efficiently. In business environments, they underpin customer relationship management (CRM) and enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, such as SAP, which use them to handle structured processes like customer interactions, inventory tracking, and supply chain operations. Financial services leverage relational databases for secure transaction processing, account management, and compliance reporting in banking and payment systems, where data integrity is paramount. Web applications, including e-commerce platforms like those built with MySQL or PostgreSQL, rely on them to store and retrieve user profiles, product catalogs, and order histories through relational links. Additionally, managed cloud services such as Amazon RDS and Google Cloud SQL offer relational database capabilities with simplified administration and support for engines including MySQL and PostgreSQL. In the no-code/low-code space, platforms like Airtable provide relational capabilities through linked records and a spreadsheet-like interface, enabling users to manage relational data without traditional programming. In scientific data management, relational databases organize experimental results, patient records, and research metadata, as seen in healthcare studies where they enable consistent querying and analysis of structured datasets.
A primary advantage of relational databases is their adherence to ACID propertiesatomicity, consistency, isolation, and durabilitywhich ensure reliable and predictable transaction handling, minimizing errors in critical operations like financial transfers. The use of standardized SQL provides portability, allowing queries and schemas to transfer seamlessly between systems, while supporting complex operations such as joins to relate data across tables and aggregations for analytical insights. For structured data, they offer scalability through techniques like indexing, sharding, and vertical scaling, enabling growth in enterprise settings without compromising performance.
Despite these strengths, relational databases have limitations when applied to certain data types; they excel with structured information but are less suitable for unstructured data, such as multimedia or semi-structured formats, due to rigid schemas that require predefined structures. Similarly, in high-velocity environments involving real-time streams, their emphasis on ACID compliance can introduce overhead, potentially slowing ingestion compared to more flexible alternatives.
As of 2025, relational databases power the majority of enterprise applications, with the global market projected to reach $82.95 billion, reflecting their enduring dominance in structured data environments. Systems like MySQL and PostgreSQL alone account for over 57% of developer usage in surveys, highlighting their widespread adoption.

History

Origins and Theoretical Foundations

The relational model originated from the work of Edgar F. Codd, a mathematician at IBM's San Jose Research Laboratory, who began developing the concept in 1969 while addressing challenges in managing large-scale data systems. In June 1970, Codd published his seminal paper, "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks," in Communications of the ACM, introducing a data organization based on mathematical relations to enable shared access to extensive formatted data banks without exposing users to underlying storage details. This work was motivated by the limitations of prevailing navigational database systems, such as hierarchical (tree-structured) and network models like IBM's IMS, which enforced rigid physical linkages, ordering, and access paths that made data retrieval inflexible and dependent on specific program knowledge of the data structure. Codd argued that these systems led to program failures when data organization changed, as applications had to navigate predefined paths, resulting in high maintenance costs and inefficiency for large shared environments.
Codd's model sought to overcome these issues through key theoretical motivations, including the elimination of data redundancy to prevent inconsistencies and wasted storage, the assurance of data independence so that changes in physical representation did not affect user queries or applications, and the representation of data using predicate logic for precise, declarative querying. By treating data as relationsn-ary sets of tupleshe proposed a "universal data sublanguage" grounded in first-order predicate calculus, allowing users to specify what data they needed rather than how to retrieve it, thus insulating applications from structural modifications. This approach addressed redundancy by defining a normal form where relations minimized derivable projections, ensuring that data could be reconstructed without duplication while maintaining logical consistency.
The theoretical foundations drew heavily from mathematical disciplines, particularly set theory for modeling relations as mathematical sets and first-order logic for query formulation and integrity enforcement. Codd's innovations at IBM built on these principles to create a framework that prioritized user protection from data organization details, stating that "future users of large data banks must be insulated from any changes in the structure of data which are made possible by improvements in base hardware and software technology." To further refine the criteria for true relational systems, Codd later proposed his 12 rules (often counted as 13, including Rule 0: the foundation rule) in 1985, outlining essential properties for a relational database management system, such as guaranteed access via logical addressing and support for view updating.

Commercial Development and Adoption

The development of commercial relational database management systems (RDBMS) began in the late 1970s, transitioning from research prototypes to market-ready products. IBM's System R, initiated in 1974 as an internal research project, served as a key prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of relational databases using SQL as the query language, influencing subsequent commercial efforts. In 1979, Oracle Corporation released the first commercially available RDBMS, initially known as Oracle Version 2, which ran on Digital Equipment Corporation hardware and marked a pivotal shift toward enterprise adoption by offering structured query capabilities for business applications. IBM followed with SQL/DS in 1981, targeted at mainframe environments, and later DB2 in 1983, which became a cornerstone for large-scale data processing in corporations.
Standardization efforts solidified the relational model's commercial viability. In 1986, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) published the first SQL standard (SQL-86, or ANSI X3.135), establishing a common syntax for querying relational databases and promoting interoperability across vendors. This was adopted internationally by the ISO in 1987 as SQL-87, with subsequent revisionssuch as SQL-92 for enhanced integrity and SQL:1999 for object-relational featuresevolving the standard to address growing complexities in data management, culminating in SQL:2023, which includes support for JSON and property graphs.
The 1980s saw an enterprise boom in RDBMS adoption, driven by the need for reliable data handling in sectors like finance and manufacturing, with products from Oracle, IBM, and others powering transaction processing systems. In the 1990s, open-source alternatives accelerated widespread use: MySQL was first released in 1995, gaining popularity for web applications due to its simplicity and performance, while PostgreSQL emerged in 1996 from the academic Postgres project, offering advanced features like extensibility for complex queries. The 2000s integrated relational databases with cloud computing, enabling scalable deployments through services like Amazon RDS (launched in 2009), which facilitated on-demand access and reduced infrastructure costs for businesses.
By 2025, relational databases maintain dominance in the DBMS market, accounting for approximately 64% of revenue in 2023 according to industry analyses, underscoring their enduring role in handling structured data amid the rise of hybrid environments.

Relational Model

Core Concepts and Terminology

In the relational model, a relation is defined as a finite set of ordered n-tuples, where each tuple consists of values drawn from specified domains, mathematically equivalent to a subset of the Cartesian product of those n domains. This structure is typically represented as a table, with no inherent ordering among the tuples or within the attributes, ensuring that the relation remains a set without duplicates.
A tuple corresponds to a single row in the relation, forming an n-tuple where the i-th component belongs to the i-th domain. Each attribute represents a column in the relation, named and associated with a specific domain that defines the allowable values for that position across all tuples. The degree of a relation is the number of attributes (n), while its cardinality is the number of distinct tuples it contains.
The relational model distinguishes between the schema, which defines the logical structure including relations, attributes, and their domains, and the instance, which is the actual collection of tuples at any given time. Data storage relies on value-based representation, where relationships between data are established solely through shared attribute values rather than physical pointers, ordering, or hierarchical links, promoting data independence.
To handle missing or inapplicable information, E.F. Codd later extended the model to include null values, which represent either "value at present unknown" or "property inapplicable," distinct from empty strings or zeros, and integrated into a three-valued logic for queries.

Mathematical Basis

The relational model is grounded in set theory and first-order predicate logic, providing a formal framework for data representation and manipulation. At its core, a domain DiD_iDi is defined as a set of atomic values that can be assigned to attributes, ensuring type consistency across the database. A relation RRR of degree nnn is formally a subset of the Cartesian product of nnn domains, expressed as $ R \subseteq D_1 \times D_2 \times \cdots \times D_n $, where each element of RRR corresponds to a valid combination of values from these domains.
A tuple in this model is a finite, ordered sequence of nnn values, with the iii-th value drawn from domain DiD_iDi, representing a single record or fact. The relation RRR itself is a set of such tuples, inherently enforcing uniqueness since sets do not permit duplicates, which eliminates redundancy at the mathematical level. Formally, a relation comprises a heading and a body: the heading specifies the attribute names paired with their respective domains (e.g., R(A1:D1,A2:D2,,An:Dn)R(A_1: D_1, A_2: D_2, \dots, A_n: D_n)R(A1:D1,A2:D2,,An:Dn)), defining the structure, while the body is the finite set of tuples populating that structure at any given time.
The foundation in predicate logic enables queries to be formulated as logical predicates applied over relations, allowing declarative expressions of data retrieval and manipulation in terms of first-order logic statements. This approach, rooted in an applied predicate calculus, supports relational completeness, where any query expressible in first-order logic can be represented within the model.

Data Organization

Relations, Tuples, and Attributes

In the relational model, a relation is conceptualized as a table that organizes data into rows and columns, where the columns represent attributes defining the characteristics of the stored entities, and the rows, known as tuples, capture individual instances or records of those entities. This structure ensures that data is stored in a declarative manner, independent of physical implementation details, allowing users to interact with it through logical representations.
To illustrate, consider a simple employee relation named Employees with three attributes: EmployeeID (an integer identifier), Name (a string for the employee's full name), and Department (a string indicating the work unit). Each tuple in this relation would consist of a unique combination of values for these attributes, such as (101, "Alice Johnson", "Engineering"), representing one employee's details without implying any order among the tuples. This tabular format facilitates straightforward comprehension and manipulation of data relationships.
Relations are categorized into base relations, which store the actual persistent data in the database (often called base tables in SQL implementations), and derived relations, such as views, which are virtual and computed dynamically from queries on base relations or other views without storing data separately. Base relations form the foundational storage, while derived ones provide flexible, on-demand perspectives of the data.
Each attribute in a relation must hold only atomic (indivisible, simple) values from its defined domain, prohibiting nested structures like lists or sets within a single cell to maintain the model's simplicity and ensure first normal form compliance. This atomicity requirement, where domains briefly specify the allowable value types (e.g., integers or strings), supports efficient querying and integrity.

Domains and Schemas

In the relational model, a domain represents the set of permissible atomic values from which the values of a specific attribute are drawn, ensuring data consistency and type safety across relations. This concept, introduced by E.F. Codd, defines domains as finite or infinite sets of values, such as the domain of integers for numeric attributes or strings for textual ones, preventing invalid entries like non-numeric values in an age field. For instance, the domain for an employee's age attribute might be restricted to integers between 18 and 65, limiting values to that range while excluding extraneous data like negative numbers or decimals.
A schema in a relational database outlines the structural blueprint, comprising relation schemas that specify the attributes of each table along with their associated domains, and the overall database schema as the integrated collection of these relation schemas, including definitions for views, indexes, and constraints where applicable. Relation schemas thus serve as the foundational descriptors, naming the table and mapping each attribute to its domain, while the database schema provides a holistic view of inter-table organization without delving into data instances. This separation allows for abstract design independent of physical storage, facilitating maintenance and scalability in large systems.
Modern relational database management systems (RDBMS) implement domains through type systems, offering built-in data types such as INTEGER for whole numbers, VARCHAR for variable-length strings, and DATE for temporal values, which align with the abstract domains of the relational model by enforcing value ranges and formats at the storage level. Users can extend these with user-defined domains, created via SQL statements like CREATE DOMAIN, which base a new type on an existing one while adding custom constraints, such as CHECK conditions to validate specific rules beyond standard types. For example, a user-defined domain for currency might build on DECIMAL with a precision of two places and a non-negative constraint, promoting reusability across attributes.
Schema evolution addresses the need to modify these structures over time in response to changing requirements, involving operations like adding or dropping attributes, altering domains, or renaming relations, often managed through versioning to track historical states and automate migrations. In practice, tools and protocols enable forward and backward compatibility, allowing applications to query evolving schemas without data loss, as demonstrated in industrial case studies where schema changes were applied incrementally to minimize downtime in production environments. This process underscores the relational model's flexibility, though it requires careful planning to preserve integrity during transitions.

Integrity Mechanisms

Keys and Relationships

In the relational model, keys are essential attributes or sets of attributes that ensure uniqueness within a relation and facilitate connections between relations. A superkey is any set of one or more attributes that uniquely identifies each tuple in a relation, allowing no two tuples to share the same values for that set. A candidate key is a minimal superkey, meaning no proper subset of its attributes is itself a superkey; multiple candidate keys may exist for a given relation, such as both employee ID and a combination of name and birthdate uniquely identifying an employee. The primary key is the candidate key selected to serve as the unique identifier for tuples in the relation, with the choice often guided by factors like simplicity and stability; for instance, in an employee relation, employee ID might be chosen as the primary key over a composite of name and address.
A foreign key is an attribute or set of attributes in one relation that matches the primary key (or a candidate key) of another relation, establishing a link between them without duplicating data. For example, in a department relation with department ID as the primary key, an employee relation might include department ID as a foreign key to indicate which department each employee belongs to. Foreign keys enable the relational model to represent associations between entities while preserving data integrity through referential constraints, ensuring that referenced values exist in the target relation.
Keys define the types of relationships between relations, which describe how tuples in one relation correspond to those in another. A one-to-one relationship occurs when each tuple in one relation is associated with at most one tuple in another, and vice versa; this can be implemented by placing the primary key of one relation as a foreign key in the other, often with mutual foreign keys or by merging relations if appropriate. For instance, a person relation might have a one-to-one link to a passport relation, where passport number serves as both primary and foreign key.
A one-to-many relationship exists when each tuple in one relation (the "one" side) can be associated with zero, one, or multiple tuples in another (the "many" side), but each tuple on the "many" side links to at most one on the "one" side; this is typically realized by placing a foreign key in the "many" relation that references the primary key of the "one" relation. In a classic example, a department relation (one side) relates to an employee relation (many side), where employees' department IDs as foreign keys point to the department's primary key, allowing one department to have multiple employees but each employee to belong to only one department.
A many-to-many relationship arises when tuples in one relation can associate with multiple tuples in another, and vice versa; direct implementation is avoided to prevent redundancy, instead using a junction (or associative) relation that contains foreign keys referencing the primary keys of both original relations, effectively decomposing the many-to-many into two one-to-many relationships. For example, a student relation and a course relation might connect via an enrollment junction relation with student ID and course ID as foreign keys, capturing multiple enrollments per student and multiple students per course. This structure supports efficient querying and updates while maintaining normalization principles.
Key TypeDefinitionExample in Employee Relation
SuperkeySet of attributes uniquely identifying tuples (may include extras){EmployeeID, Name, Address}
Candidate KeyMinimal superkey (no subset is a superkey){EmployeeID}, {SSN}
Primary KeySelected candidate key for unique identificationEmployeeID
Foreign KeyReferences primary key of another relationDepartmentID (referencing Departments table)

Constraints and Referential Integrity

In relational databases, constraints are rules enforced on data to maintain accuracy, consistency, and validity across relations. These mechanisms prevent invalid states by restricting operations that would violate predefined conditions, such as insertions, updates, or deletions that introduce inconsistencies.
Entity integrity is a fundamental constraint ensuring that the primary key of every tuple in a relation is neither null nor contains duplicate values, thereby guaranteeing that each entity can be uniquely identified without ambiguity. This rule applies specifically to primary key attributes, prohibiting nulls to uphold the relational model's requirement for identifiable records.
Referential integrity maintains consistency between related relations by requiring that the value of a foreign key in one relation either matches an existing primary key value in the referenced relation or is null, thus avoiding orphaned records or invalid references. Violations of this constraint occur during operations like deleting a referenced primary key or updating a foreign key to an unmatched value. To handle such violations, database systems support actions including RESTRICT, which blocks the operation if it would break the reference; CASCADE, which propagates the delete or update to dependent foreign keys; SET NULL, which sets the foreign key to null; or SET DEFAULT, which assigns a default value, depending on the system's implementation.
Check constraints enforce custom business rules on attribute values within a relation, such as ensuring an employee's age is greater than 18 or a salary exceeds a minimum threshold, by evaluating a Boolean expression during data modification. These constraints are declarative, specified at the table level, and apply to single or multiple columns, rejecting operations that fail the condition to preserve semantic correctness.
Unique constraints extend beyond primary keys by ensuring that values in one or more columns are distinct across all tuples in a relation, allowing null values (unlike primary keys) to support alternate unique identifiers, such as email addresses in a user table. This prevents duplicates in non-primary attributes while permitting flexibility for optional uniqueness requirements.

Querying and Manipulation

Relational Algebra Operations

Relational algebra provides a procedural framework for querying and manipulating relations in the relational model, where each operation takes one or more relations as input and yields a new relation as output. Introduced by Edgar F. Codd in 1970, it emphasizes set-theoretic foundations to ensure data independence and structured manipulation. The operations are designed to be composable, forming a closed system that maintains relational integrity throughout computations.
The fundamental operations, often termed primitive, encompass selection, projection, union, set difference, Cartesian product, and rename. These primitives enable the expression of basic data retrieval and combination tasks. Selection, symbolized as \sigma, filters tuples from a relation RRR that satisfy a predicate PPP, defined formally as:
P(R)={ttRP(t)}
\sigma_P(R) = \{ t \mid t \in R \land P(t) \}
P(R)={ttRP(t)}
where PPP involves comparisons like equality or inequality and logical connectives. Projection, denoted \Pi, extracts specified attributes from RRR while eliminating duplicates to ensure the result remains a relation, expressed as A1,A2,,Ak(R)\Pi_{A_1, A_2, \dots, A_k}(R)A1,A2,,Ak(R), with A1A_1A1 to AkA_kAk as the chosen attributes.
Union, indicated by \cup, merges tuples from two type-compatible relations RRR and SSS (same arity and corresponding domains), yielding:
RS={ttRtS}
R \cup S = \{ t \mid t \in R \lor t \in S \}
RS={ttRtS}
with duplicates removed. Set difference, using -, identifies tuples unique to RRR relative to SSS:
RS={ttRtS}
R - S = \{ t \mid t \in R \land t \notin S \}
RS={ttRt/S}
applicable only to compatible relations. Cartesian product, \times, generates all possible pairings of tuples from RRR and SSS:
RS={tqtRqS}
R \times S = \{ tq \mid t \in R \land q \in S \}
RS={tqtRqS}
assuming attribute names are distinct or renamed if overlapping. Rename, \rho, reassigns names to relations or attributes, such as T(R)\rho_{T}(R)T(R) to designate RRR as TTT, facilitating composition without name conflicts.
Derived operations build upon the primitives to handle common relational tasks more directly, including join, intersection, and division. Natural join, \bowtie, links RRR and SSS on matching values of shared attributes, equivalent to a theta join (generalized condition) restricted to equality, and formally:
RS=X(P(RS))
R \bowtie S = \Pi_X \left( \sigma_P (R \times S) \right)
RS=X(P(RS))
where PPP enforces equality on common attributes and XXX selects output attributes. Theta join extends this to arbitrary conditions in PPP, such as inequalities. Intersection, \cap, retrieves shared tuples:
RS={ttRtS}
R \cap S = \{ t \mid t \in R \land t \in S \}
RS={ttRtS}
derivable as R(RS)R - (R - S)R(RS), requiring compatibility. Division, \div, identifies attribute values in the projection of RRR (excluding SSS's attributes) that associate with every tuple in SSS:
RS={ttRS(R)uS(tuR)}
R \div S = \{ t \mid t \in \Pi_{R - S}(R) \land \forall u \in S \, (tu \in R) \}
RS={ttRS(R)uS(tuR)}
useful for queries like "all parts supplied by every supplier."
These operations exhibit closure: any composition results in a valid relation, enabling the construction of arbitrary query expressions through nesting and sequencing. This expressiveness allows relational algebra to represent all information-retrieval requests expressible in the model, serving as the theoretical core for languages like SQL.

SQL as the Standard Language

SQL, or Structured Query Language, emerged as the declarative language for managing and querying relational databases, providing a standardized interface that translates relational algebra concepts into practical syntax for data operations. Developed in 1974 by Donald D. Chamberlin and Raymond F. Boyce as SEQUEL (Structured English QUEry Language) for IBM's System R research project, it was designed to demonstrate the viability of Edgar F. Codd's relational model in a prototype database system. The language was later shortened to SQL due to trademark issues and evolved through System R's phases, unifying data definition, manipulation, and view mechanisms by 1976. This foundation enabled SQL to become the de facto standard, influencing commercial systems like IBM's SQL/DS and DB2.
SQL is categorized into sublanguages that handle distinct aspects of database interaction. Data Definition Language (DDL) includes commands like CREATE and ALTER to define and modify database structures such as tables and schemas, while DROP removes them. Data Manipulation Language (DML) encompasses SELECT for querying data, INSERT for adding rows, UPDATE for modifying existing data, and DELETE for removing rows. Data Control Language (DCL) manages access with GRANT to assign privileges and REVOKE to withdraw them, ensuring security over database objects.
At the heart of SQL lies the SELECT statement, which retrieves data from one or more tables using a structured syntax that supports complex filtering and aggregation. The basic form is SELECT column_list FROM table_list ;, where FROM specifies the source tables, WHERE filters rows before grouping, GROUP BY aggregates data into groups, HAVING applies conditions to groups, and ORDER BY sorts the results. Joins, such as INNER JOIN or LEFT JOIN, combine rows from multiple tables based on related columns, while subqueriesnested SELECT statementsallow embedding queries within clauses like WHERE or FROM for advanced filtering, such as selecting employees with salaries above the departmental average.
SQL's standardization began with ANSI's adoption as X3.135 in 1986, followed by ISO as 9075 in 1987, establishing core syntax and semantics across implementations. The ISO/IEC 9075 standard, now in its 2023 edition, comprises nine parts, including SQL/Foundation for core language elements and optional modules like SQL/JSON for document handling; it defines conformance levels such as Core (mandatory features) and Enhanced (vendor extensions). Over time, SQL has evolved from SQL-86's basic relational operations to SQL:1999's introduction of Common Table Expressions (CTEs) for readable subquery reuse and window functions for analytics like ROW_NUMBER() over ordered partitions without collapsing rows. SQL:2016 added JSON support for storing and querying semi-structured data, while SQL:2023 enhances this with native JSON types, scalar functions, and simplified accessors like dot notation for nested objects, alongside improvements to recursive CTEs for handling cycles in hierarchical data. These advancements support modern analytics workloads while maintaining backward compatibility.

Database Design

Normalization Process

The normalization process in relational databases involves systematically decomposing relations into smaller, well-structured components to eliminate data redundancies and dependency anomalies while preserving the information content of the original database. This step-by-step refinement ensures that the database schema adheres to progressively stricter normal forms, based on constraints known as functional dependencies. The goal is to design a schema that minimizes update, insertion, and deletion anomalies, thereby improving data integrity and consistency.
Functional dependencies form the foundational constraints in this process. A functional dependency (FD) exists in a relation R when one set of attributes X functionally determines another set Y, denoted as X Y, meaning that for any two tuples in R that agree on X, they must also agree on Y. This concept was introduced as part of the relational model to capture semantic relationships between attributes. FDs help identify potential redundancies, such as when non-key attributes depend on only part of a composite key, leading to anomalies during data modifications.
To infer all implied FDs from a given set, Armstrong's axioms provide a complete set of inference rules. These axioms, developed by William W. Armstrong, include three primary rules: reflexivity, augmentation, and transitivity. Reflexivity states that if Y is a subset of X, then X Y holds trivially. Augmentation asserts that if X Y, then for any Z, XZ YZ. Transitivity implies that if X Y and Y Z, then X Z. Additional derived rules, such as union and decomposition, can be proven from these basics, ensuring soundness and completeness for FD inference.
The normalization process progresses through a series of normal forms, each building on the previous to address specific types of dependencies. First Normal Form (1NF) requires that all attributes in a relation contain atomic (indivisible) values, eliminating repeating groups or multivalued attributes within tuples. This ensures the relation resembles a mathematical table with no nested structures.
Second Normal Form (2NF) extends 1NF by requiring that no non-prime attribute (one not part of any candidate key) is partially dependent on any candidate key. In other words, every non-key attribute must depend on the entire candidate key, not just a portion of it. This eliminates partial dependencies, which can cause update anomalies in relations with composite keys. Third Normal Form (3NF) further refines 2NF by prohibiting transitive dependencies, where a non-prime attribute depends on another non-prime attribute rather than directly on a candidate key. A relation is in 3NF if, for every FD X Y, either X is a superkey or each attribute in Y - X is prime. These forms were formalized to free relations from insertion, update, and deletion dependencies.
Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF) imposes a stricter condition than 3NF: for every non-trivial FD X Y in the relation, X must be a candidate key (a minimal superkey). This addresses cases where 3NF allows determinants that are not superkeys, potentially leading to anomalies in relations with overlapping candidate keys. BCNF ensures every determinant is a candidate key, making it particularly useful for eliminating certain redundancy issues not resolved by 3NF.
Higher normal forms target more complex dependencies. Fourth Normal Form (4NF) deals with multivalued dependencies (MVDs), where an attribute set is independent of another but both depend on a common key. A relation is in 4NF if it is in BCNF and has no non-trivial MVDs other than those implied by FDs. This prevents redundancy from independent multivalued facts, such as multiple hobbies per person unrelated to skills. MVDs generalize FDs and were defined to capture such scenarios. Fifth Normal Form (5NF), also known as Project-Join Normal Form (PJ/NF), addresses join dependencies, where a relation can be decomposed into projections that can be rejoined without spurious tuples. A relation is in 5NF if it is in 4NF and every join dependency is implied by the candidate keys. This form eliminates anomalies from cyclic dependencies across multiple relations.
In practice, the normalization process begins by identifying all relevant FDs (and higher dependencies for advanced forms) using domain knowledge and Armstrong's axioms to compute closures. The schema is then decomposed iteratively: for violations of a target normal form, select an offending FD X Y, project the relation into R1 = (X Y) and R2 = (attributes of R - Y), and replace the original with these projections. Decompositions must be losslessmeaning the natural join of the projections equals the original relation without spurious tuplesto preserve data. This is verified if the FDs include a condition where one projection's key is contained in the other. The process continues until the schema satisfies the desired normal form, balancing integrity with query efficiency.

Denormalization and Performance Considerations

Denormalization involves intentionally introducing redundancy into a relational database schema that has been normalized to higher normal forms, such as third normal form (3NF), to enhance query performance at the expense of storage efficiency and data consistency maintenance. This technique counters the strict elimination of redundancy in normalization by selectively duplicating data, thereby reducing the computational overhead of joins and aggregations during read operations.
Common denormalization strategies include creating pre-joined tables, where data from multiple normalized tables is combined into a single table to eliminate runtime joins for frequently queried combinations. For example, in an e-commerce system, customer and order details might be merged into one table to speed up retrieval of order histories. Another approach is implementing summary aggregates, which precompute and store results of common aggregation functions like sums or averages, avoiding repeated calculations on large datasets. This is particularly useful for reporting queries involving totals, such as monthly sales figures stored directly in a denormalized summary table. Clustering, as a design strategy, groups related records physically or logically within tables to minimize data scattering, facilitating faster scans and range queries without relying solely on indexes.
The primary trade-offs of denormalization center on improved read performance versus increased risks of update anomalies and higher storage costs. By duplicating data, queries can execute fasteroften reducing response times by orders of magnitude for join-heavy operationsbut updates require propagating changes across redundant copies, potentially leading to inconsistencies if not managed carefully. Storage overhead rises due to redundancy, which can be significant in large-scale systems, though this is offset in read-intensive environments where query speed is paramount.
Denormalization is most appropriate for high-read workloads, such as analytical reporting or online analytical processing (OLAP) systems, where complex queries dominate over frequent updates typical in online transaction processing (OLTP). In OLAP scenarios, denormalized schemas support multidimensional analysis by flattening hierarchies, enabling sub-second responses on terabyte-scale data. Conversely, OLTP environments, focused on concurrent transactions, generally avoid extensive denormalization to preserve data integrity during writes.
Modern relational database management systems (RDBMS) provide materialized views as a controlled mechanism for denormalization, storing precomputed query results that can be refreshed periodically or incrementally. These views act as virtual denormalized tables, combining the benefits of redundancy for fast reads with automated maintenance to mitigate update anomalies. For instance, Oracle's materialized views support equi-joins and aggregations optimized for data warehousing, reducing query times while integrating with the underlying normalized schema. This approach, rooted in incremental view maintenance techniques, balances performance gains with consistency in production environments.

Advanced Features

Transactions and ACID Properties

In relational databases, a transaction is defined as a logical unit of work consisting of a sequence of operations, such as reads and writes, that are executed as a single, indivisible entity to maintain data integrity. Transactions typically begin with a BEGIN statement, proceed through a series of database operations, and conclude with either a COMMIT to permanently apply the changes or a ROLLBACK to undo them entirely, ensuring that partial failures do not leave the database in an inconsistent state. This mechanism allows complex operations, like transferring funds between accounts, to be treated atomically, preventing issues such as overdrafts if one step fails.
The reliability of transactions in relational databases is ensured through the ACID properties (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability), a set of guarantees that ensure reliable transaction processing; the acronym was coined by Theo Hrder and Andreas Reuter in 1983. Atomicity requires that a transaction is executed completely or not at all; if any operation fails, the entire transaction is rolled back, restoring the database to its pre-transaction state. Consistency mandates that a transaction brings the database from one valid state to another, preserving integrity constraints such as primary keys, foreign keys, and check constraints after completion. Isolation ensures that concurrent transactions do not interfere with each other, making each transaction appear to execute in isolation even when running in parallel. Durability guarantees that once a transaction is committed, its effects are permanently stored, surviving subsequent system failures through techniques like write-ahead logging.
To balance isolation with performance in multi-user environments, relational databases implement varying isolation levels as defined by the ANSI SQL standard, which specify the degree to which concurrent transactions are shielded from each other's effects. The read uncommitted level allows a transaction to read data modified by another uncommitted transaction, potentially leading to dirty reads but maximizing concurrency. Read committed prevents dirty reads by ensuring reads only from committed data, though it permits non-repeatable reads where the same query may yield different results within a transaction. Repeatable read avoids non-repeatable reads by locking read data until the transaction ends, but it may still allow phantom reads from new insertions by other transactions. The strictest, serializable, fully emulates sequential execution, preventing all anomalies including phantoms through techniques like locking or timestamping, at the cost of reduced concurrency.
For distributed relational databases spanning multiple nodes, the two-phase commit (2PC) protocol coordinates transactions to achieve atomicity and consistency across sites. In the first phase, a coordinator polls participants to prepare the transaction; each votes yes if it can commit locally or no if it cannot, with all logging their intent durably. If all vote yes, the second phase issues a global commit, propagating the decision; otherwise, an abort is sent, and all roll back. This ensures that either all sites commit or none do, though it can block if the coordinator fails, requiring recovery mechanisms.

Stored Procedures, Triggers, and Views

Stored procedures are pre-compiled blocks of SQL code stored in the database that can be invoked repeatedly to perform complex operations, such as data manipulation or business logic execution, often with input and output parameters for flexibility. They originated as an extension to SQL in commercial RDBMS implementations, with Oracle introducing PL/SQL stored procedures in Oracle7 in 1992 to enhance reusability and reduce network traffic by executing code server-side. Stored procedures support error handling through exception blocks and can include conditional logic, making them suitable for encapsulating database-side programming.
A basic example of creating a stored procedure in PL/SQL, Oracle's procedural extension to SQL, is as follows:
CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE update_employee_salary(emp_id IN NUMBER, raise_pct IN NUMBER)
IS
BEGIN
 UPDATE employees
 SET salary = salary * (1 + raise_pct / 100)
 WHERE employee_id = emp_id;
 
 IF SQL%ROWCOUNT = 0 THEN
 RAISE_APPLICATION_ERROR(-20001, 'Employee not found');
 END IF;
 
 COMMIT;
EXCEPTION
 WHEN OTHERS THEN
 ROLLBACK;
 RAISE;
END update_employee_salary;
This procedure updates an employee's salary by a percentage and includes error handling if no rows are affected. In Microsoft SQL Server, Transact-SQL (T-SQL) provides similar functionality, allowing procedures to accept parameters and manage transactions internally.
Triggers are special types of stored procedures that automatically execute in response to specific database events, such as INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE operations on a table or view, enabling automation of tasks like data validation or auditing. They were introduced alongside stored procedures in early RDBMS to enforce rules implicitly without application-level code, with Oracle supporting them since version 7. DML triggers, the most common type, fire for each affected row (row-level) or once per statement (statement-level), and can access special variables like OLD and NEW to reference pre- and post-event data.
For instance, a T-SQL trigger in SQL Server for audit logging on an UPDATE event might look like this:
CREATE TRIGGER tr_employees_audit
ON employees
AFTER UPDATE
AS
BEGIN
 INSERT INTO audit_log (table_name, operation, changed_at)
 SELECT 'employees', 'UPDATE', GETDATE()
 WHERE @@ROWCOUNT > 0;
END;
This trigger logs updates to an audit table automatically after the operation completes. Triggers promote data integrity by responding immediately to changes, though they require careful design to avoid recursive firing or performance issues.
Views serve as virtual tables derived from one or more base tables via a stored query, providing a simplified or restricted perspective of the underlying data without storing it physically, which aids in abstraction and security. Introduced in the original SQL standard (ANSI X3.135-1986), views hide complex joins or sensitive columns, enabling row-level security by limiting access to subsets of data based on user privileges. They can be updatable if based on a single table with no aggregates, allowing modifications that propagate to the base tables.
An example of creating a view in standard SQL, compatible with systems like PostgreSQL, is:
CREATE VIEW active_employees AS
SELECT employee_id, first_name, last_name, department
FROM employees
WHERE status = 'active';
Querying this view (SELECT * FROM active_employees) returns only current employees, abstracting the full table and enforcing access controls. Views thus facilitate modular database design by decoupling applications from physical schema changes.

Implementation

RDBMS Architecture

The ANSI/SPARC three-schema architecture provides a foundational framework for relational database management systems (RDBMS), dividing the database into three abstraction levels to promote data independence and modularity. The external level consists of multiple user views, each tailored to specific applications or end-users, presenting only relevant portions of the data in a customized format without exposing the underlying structure. The conceptual level defines the logical schema, encompassing the entire database's entities, attributes, relationships, and constraints in a community-wide model independent of physical storage details. The internal level handles the physical schema, specifying how data is stored on disk, including file organizations and access paths optimized for efficiency.
Mappings between these levels ensure data independence, allowing modifications at one level without impacting others. The external/conceptual mapping translates user views to the logical schema, supporting logical data independence by enabling view changes without altering the conceptual model. Similarly, the conceptual/internal mapping converts the logical schema to physical storage, providing physical data independence so storage optimizations can occur without affecting higher levels. This separation enhances system flexibility, as changes in user requirements or hardware can be isolated.
Core RDBMS components operate across these levels to manage queries and storage. The query processor handles SQL statement processing, comprising a parser that validates syntax and semantics, an optimizer that generates efficient execution plans using techniques like cost-based selection, and an executor that runs the plan via iterator-based operators to retrieve and manipulate data. The storage manager oversees data persistence and access, including subcomponents like the buffer manager, which controls data transfers between disk and main memory using a shared buffer pool with replacement policies such as LRU-2 to minimize I/O operations. It also incorporates a transaction manager to enforce ACID properties through locking protocols like two-phase locking and write-ahead logging for concurrency and recovery.
At the internal level, relations are stored using specific file structures to balance access efficiency and storage overhead. Heap files organize records in insertion order without sorting, suiting full scans or append-heavy workloads by allowing fast inserts at the file end. Sorted files maintain records in key order, facilitating range queries and equality searches through binary search, though inserts require costly maintenance to preserve ordering. Hashed files employ a hash function on a key to distribute records across buckets, enabling O(1) average-case lookups for equality selections at the expense of range query support.

Indexing and Optimization Techniques

Indexing in relational database management systems (RDBMS) enhances query performance by providing efficient data access structures, reducing the need for full table scans on large datasets. Indexes organize data in a way that allows the query executor to locate and retrieve specific rows quickly, often at logarithmic time complexity. Common index types include B-trees, hash indexes, and bitmap indexes, each suited to different query patterns and data characteristics.
B-tree indexes, introduced as a balanced tree structure for maintaining ordered data, serve as the default for most equality and range queries in RDBMS. They consist of internal nodes pointing to child nodes or leaf nodes containing key-value pairs, ensuring balanced height for O(log n) search, insertion, and deletion operations. B-trees excel in scenarios requiring sorted access, such as ORDER BY clauses or range conditions like salary BETWEEN 50000 AND 80000.
Hash indexes, designed for exact-match lookups, use a hash function to map keys to buckets in an array-like structure, enabling constant-time O(1) average-case access for equality predicates. They are particularly effective for primary key lookups in point queries but less suitable for range scans due to the unordered nature of hash buckets. Extendible hashing variants address bucket overflows dynamically, making them adaptable to varying data volumes in relational systems.
Bitmap indexes are optimized for attributes with low cardinality, where the number of distinct values is small relative to the row count, such as gender or status flags. Each distinct value is represented by a bitmapa bit vector of length equal to the table's row countwhere a '1' indicates the presence of that value in a row. This structure supports fast bitwise operations for conjunctive and disjunctive queries, reducing I/O for selective predicates on low-cardinality columns.
Query optimization in RDBMS involves selecting the most efficient execution strategy from multiple possible plans, balancing factors like CPU, I/O, and memory costs. Cost-based optimization, pioneered in System R, estimates plan costs using statistics on table sizes, index selectivity, and cardinalities to generate dynamic programming tables for evaluating join methods and access paths. This approach outperforms rule-based methods by adapting to data distribution, though it requires accurate statistics for reliable estimates.
Heuristic rules complement cost-based techniques by applying predefined transformations to prune the search space early, such as pushing selections before joins or projecting only needed columns to minimize intermediate result sizes. These rules, like performing restrictions as early as possible, ensure efficient plan enumeration even for complex queries, reducing optimization time from exponential to polynomial in many cases.
Execution plans detail the sequence of operations for query processing, including access methods and join strategies. Index scans traverse only relevant index portions for selective queries, contrasting with table scans that read entire tables, which are preferable for low-selectivity conditions where index overhead exceeds benefits. Join order determination, often via dynamic programming, minimizes intermediate result sizes by joining smaller relations first, with bushy trees allowing parallel evaluation in modern optimizers.
Caching mechanisms, such as buffer pools, mitigate disk I/O by holding frequently accessed pages in memory, managed via least-recently-used (LRU) replacement policies to prioritize "hot" data. Buffer pools allocate fixed memory regions to cache table and index pages, enabling sub-millisecond access for repeated queries on working sets smaller than available RAM. Constraints like primary keys can influence index usage in caching, as they enforce uniqueness and accelerate lookups.
Recent advancements incorporate AI-driven auto-tuning for query optimization, leveraging machine learning to refine execution plans and parameters dynamically. In PostgreSQL extensions like Balsa and LEON, reinforcement learning models analyze historical query patterns to suggest index configurations and join strategies, achieving up to 2-5x speedup on workloads with variable selectivity without manual intervention. These techniques represent a shift toward adaptive, self-optimizing RDBMS.

Modern Extensions

Distributed Relational Databases

Distributed relational databases extend traditional relational database management systems (RDBMS) by partitioning and replicating data across multiple nodes to handle increased load, ensure high availability, and manage large-scale data volumes. This approach maintains relational integrity and SQL compatibility while addressing scalability limitations of single-node systems. Key mechanisms include sharding for data distribution and replication for redundancy, often combined to balance performance and reliability.
Horizontal sharding, also known as horizontal partitioning, divides a database table into smaller subsets called shards, typically based on a shard key such as a user ID or geographic region, with each shard stored on a separate node. This strategy enables parallel processing of queries and scales write throughput by localizing operations to specific nodes. For instance, range-based sharding assigns contiguous key ranges to shards, while hash-based sharding distributes keys evenly using a hash function to minimize hotspots.
Replication complements sharding by maintaining multiple copies of data across nodes to enhance read performance and fault tolerance. In master-slave replication, a single master node handles all writes, propagating changes asynchronously or synchronously to slave nodes that serve read queries, reducing load on the master and providing failover options. Multi-master replication allows writes on multiple nodes, synchronizing changes among them, which supports higher write scalability but introduces complexity in conflict resolution, often using last-write-wins or versioning schemes. MySQL, for example, supports both via its replication framework, where master-slave setups are common for read scaling, and group replication enables multi-master configurations.
Consistency models in distributed relational databases trade off between strong consistency, where all nodes reflect the latest committed data, and eventual consistency, where updates propagate over time. The CAP theorem, formalized by Gilbert and Lynch, posits that in the presence of network partitions (P), a system can prioritize either consistency (C) or availability (A), but not both. Relational databases traditionally favor CP systems, ensuring ACID transactions across nodes via protocols like two-phase commit (2PC), but this may sacrifice availability during partitions. Some modern implementations relax to AP models for better scalability, accepting temporary inconsistencies resolved through reconciliation. Brewer's original conjecture highlighted these trade-offs in distributed systems design.
Distributed joins pose significant challenges due to data locality, requiring data movement across nodes via techniques like broadcast, redistribution, or semi-joins, which incur high network and CPU overhead. For example, joining tables sharded on different keys may necessitate shipping entire partitions, exacerbating latency in large clusters. Optimization strategies include co-partitioning related tables on the same key to localize joins.
The two-phase commit protocol ensures atomicity in distributed transactions by coordinating a prepare phase and a commit phase across nodes, but its overheadfrom multiple message rounds and blockingcan bottleneck performance, especially under high contention or failures. Extensions like presumed abort reduce this by assuming aborts on timeouts, minimizing coordinator involvement. Distributed transactions extend single-node ACID properties using such protocols, though at increased cost.
Middleware solutions like Vitess address these issues for MySQL-based systems by providing transparent sharding, query routing, and connection pooling across shards, allowing applications to interact with a unified database view while handling resharding without downtime. Vitess uses a keyspace-shard model, where VSchema defines routing rules, enabling efficient distributed operations.

Cloud-Native and NewSQL Systems

Cloud-native relational database management systems (RDBMS) are designed specifically for cloud environments, leveraging virtualization, containerization, and orchestration to provide seamless scalability and management without underlying infrastructure concerns. These systems, such as managed services for traditional RDBMS including PostgreSQL and MySQLfor example, Amazon RDS (including Amazon Aurora) and Google Cloud SQLenable automatic resource provisioning and high availability across distributed cloud regions. Amazon Aurora, a fully managed service compatible with MySQL and PostgreSQL, employs a cloud-native storage architecture that separates compute from storage, allowing serverless scaling where capacity adjusts dynamically based on workload demands, achieving up to five times the throughput of standard MySQL instances. Similarly, Google Cloud SQL offers managed instances for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and SQL Server, with built-in automation for backups, patching, and replication, ensuring 99.99% availability through multi-zone deployments and pay-per-use pricing models.
NewSQL databases extend relational principles to distributed environments while preserving ACID compliance, addressing scalability limitations of traditional RDBMS in cloud settings. CockroachDB, a PostgreSQL-compatible system, distributes data across clusters using a key-value store foundation, supporting horizontal scaling and geo-partitioning for global applications without sacrificing transactional consistency. TiDB, MySQL-compatible, employs a hybrid architecture combining SQL processing with a distributed key-value backend, enabling elastic scaling to petabyte levels while maintaining strong consistency via Raft consensus. These systems build on distributed strategies to handle massive concurrency, making them suitable for cloud-native workloads like microservices and real-time analytics.
Recent developments from 2024 to 2025 have integrated artificial intelligence into relational databases for enhanced automation, particularly in query optimization. Oracle Autonomous Database incorporates Select AI, allowing natural language prompts to generate and explain SQL queries, while machine learning algorithms automatically tune performance by adjusting indexes and resource allocation in real time. Additionally, hybrid SQL/NoSQL features have emerged in cloud systems, such as vector search capabilities in CockroachDB and TiDB, enabling unified handling of structured relational data alongside unstructured elements for AI-driven applications.
Key advantages of cloud-native and NewSQL systems include auto-scaling to match demand, reducing over-provisioning, and pay-per-use billing that aligns costs with actual usage, potentially lowering expenses by up to 50% compared to on-premises setups. Market adoption has accelerated, with cloud database services projected to reach $23.84 billion in 2025, representing about 30% of organizations operating in fully cloud-native modes and driving overall relational database deployments toward greater cloud reliance.

References

What is a Relational Database? - IBM

What Is a Relational Database? (RDBMS)? - Oracle

A relational model of data for large shared data banks

The relational database - IBM

What Is Structured Query Language (SQL)? - IBM

https://blog.stackademic.com/types-of-databases-in-use-today-and-their-real-world-applications-36d8cf4cf5a7

Different Types of Databases & When To Use Them | Rivery

10 Best Databases for Web Applications to Use in 2025 - Bitcot

Developing a Relational Database for Best Practice Data Management

Types of Databases, Pros & Cons, and Real-World Examples

Relational vs Non-Relational Databases: A Complete Breakdown

Relational Database Global Market Report 2025

The Most Popular Databases Used In 2025 - WebCreek

Edgar F. Codd - IBM

 A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks

 The relational model for database management - CodeBlab

Codd's Twelve Rules - Simple Talk - Redgate Software

50 years of the relational database - Oracle

The early history of databases and DB2 - DataGeek.blog

The SQL Standard - ISO/IEC 9075:2023 (ANSI X3.135)

The Evolution of SQL: From SQL-86 to SQL-2023 - Coginiti

6 The Rise of Relational Databases | Funding a Revolution

MySQL Retrospective - The Early Years - Oracle Blogs

A brief history of databases: From relational, to NoSQL, to distributed ...

Database Management System Market Projected to Reach $225.17 ...

Extending the database relational model to capture more meaning

RELATIONAL DATABASES

Relational Databases

 Lecture Notes - 01 Relational Model & Algebra - CMU 15-445/645

A formal definition of the relational model | ACM SIGMOD Record

Relational Schema - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

Data Types - Oracle Help Center

Data types (Transact-SQL) - SQL Server - Microsoft Learn

Documentation: 18: CREATE DOMAIN - PostgreSQL

Schema evolution in database systems: an annotated bibliography

Relational Database Schema Evolution: An Industrial Case Study

Automating the database schema evolution process

1.3. Relational Integrity Constraints Database - OpenDSA

 The Relational Data Model and Relational Database Constraints

 The Relational Model theoretical foundation

Foreign key (referential) constraints - IBM

21 Data Integrity

Primary and foreign key constraints - SQL Server - Microsoft Learn

Unique constraints and check constraints - SQL - Microsoft Learn

Primary key, referential integrity, check, and unique constraints - IBM

Types of constraints - IBM

 Chapter 3: Relational Model

A history and evaluation of System R | Communications of the ACM

Types of SQL Statements - Oracle Help Center

D

ISO/IEC 9075-2:2016 - Information technology Database languages

SQL:2023 is finished: Here is what's new | Peter Eisentraut

 Further Normalization of the Data Base Relational Model

Normalized data base structure

 Dependency Structures of Data Base Relationships

Multivalued dependencies and a new normal form for relational ...

Normal forms and relational database operators - ACM Digital Library

The theory of joins in relational databases - ACM Digital Library

Denormalization guidelines for base and transaction tables

Denormalization strategies for data retrieval from data warehouses

Normalization in a Mixed OLTP and OLAP Workload Scenario

 Materialized Views in Oracle - VLDB Endowment

 Maintenance of Materialized Views - Informatics Homepages Server

 Jim Gray - The Transaction Concept: Virtues and Limitations

 A Critique of ANSI SQL Isolation Levels - Microsoft

 Lecture Notes in Computer Science - Jim Gray

Developing and Using Stored Procedures

Introduction to Oracle Database

9 PL/SQL Triggers - Database - Oracle Help Center

DML Triggers - Oracle Help Center

CREATE TRIGGER (Transact-SQL) - SQL Server - Microsoft Learn

9 Using Triggers - Oracle Help Center

6 Partitions, Views, and Other Schema Objects - Oracle Help Center

CREATE VIEW (Transact-SQL) - SQL Server - Microsoft Learn

Documentation: 18: CREATE VIEW - PostgreSQL

 Reference model for DBMS standardization: database architecture ...

 Architecture of a Database System - Berkeley

 File Organizations and Indexing

 Organization and Maintenance of Large Ordered Indices

 Bitmap Index Design and Evaluation - CMU 15-721

 Access Path Selection in a Relational Database Management System

 Polynomial Heuristics for Query Optimization - Microsoft

Execution plan overview - SQL Server | Microsoft Learn

 15-445/645 Database Systems (Fall 2023) - 06 Buffer Pools

 AI/ML-Driven Query Optimization Using Balsa and LEON

Sharding pattern - Azure Architecture Center | Microsoft Learn

What is Database Sharding? - Shard DB Explained - Amazon AWS

Database Sharding - System Design - GeeksforGeeks

Single-Master and Multi-Master Replication in DBMS - GeeksforGeeks

 Advanced Join Strategies for Large-Scale Distributed Computation

Towards a Non-2PC Transaction Management in Distributed ...

Sharding - The Vitess Docs

Relational Database Amazon Aurora MySQL PostgreSQL Features

What is Amazon Aurora? - Amazon Aurora - AWS Documentation

Cloud SQL for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and SQL Server - Google Cloud

Google Cloud SQL: Automated MySQL, PostgreSQL & SQL Server ...

CockroachDB | Distributed SQL for always-on customer experiences

What is distributed SQL? The evolution of the database

What Is a Distributed Database? A Complete Guide - TiDB

TiDB vs. CockroachDB: the Distributed Clash between MySQL and ...

Autonomous AI Database Select AI - Oracle

Examples of Using Select AI - Oracle Help Center

The State of RDBMS in 2025: Recent Trends and Developments

The Hybrid Approach with SQL, NoSQL, and NewSQL in 2025 Web ...

What are Cloud-Native Databases? Key Benefits & Use Cases

The Ultimate Guide to Cloud Native Databases - RisingWave

Cloud Database and DBaas Market Size & Share Analysis

90+ Cloud Computing Statistics: A 2025 Market Snapshot - CloudZero

PostgreSQL: The world's most advanced open source database

Fully Managed Relational Database Amazon RDS AWS

Cloud SQL for MySQL, PostgreSQL, and SQL Server | Google Cloud

Amazon Relational Database Service (RDS)

Google Cloud SQL

Understanding linked record relationships in Airtable
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion