Reproducible builds Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Reproducible builds
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Reproducible builds are a set of software development practices designed to ensure that, given the same source code, build environment, and instructions, any party can recreate bit-by-bit identical copies of specified software artifacts, such as executables or distribution packages. This approach creates an independently verifiable path from human-readable source code to the binary code used in production, allowing third parties to confirm that distributed binaries match the claimed source without relying on trust in a single distributor.
The primary motivation for reproducible builds is to enhance software security and trustworthiness, particularly in open-source ecosystems where binaries are distributed widely and could be tampered with during compilation. By enabling bit-for-bit verificationoften through cryptographic hashesreproducible builds help detect supply chain attacks, backdoors, or unauthorized modifications, while also supporting regulatory compliance for licensing and export controls. Challenges in achieving reproducibility include non-deterministic factors like timestamps, file orders, or environment variables (e.g., locale settings), which tools like SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH and strip-nondeterminism address by standardizing these elements across builds. Beyond security, the practice improves transparency, resilience against compromised build systems, and debugging efficiency in projects.
The concept traces its roots to the early 1990s, when GNU tools first implemented deterministic compilation techniques, though widespread adoption began later. Momentum built in the 2010s, spurred by security concerns in cryptocurrency and privacy tools: in 2011, Gitian was developed for Bitcoin to enable verifiable builds, and in 2013, the Tor Browser achieved reproducibility under Mike Perry's leadership. That same year, the Debian project initiated systematic efforts at DebConf13, led by figures like Lunar and Holger Levsen, conducting the first mass rebuild that found 24% of packages reproducible; by 2015, this rose to 80% through tools like .buildinfo files and continuous integration via jenkins.debian.net. Debian formalized reproducibility in its policy by 2017, with penalties for non-reproducible changes introduced during Debian 14's development starting in 2025, and a long-term goal of 100% reproducibility by 2031. Debian 13, released in August 2025, achieved approximately 98% reproducible packages, though full system reproducibility is ongoing.
Today, reproducible builds are adopted across major distributions and projects, including Arch Linux (around 86% reproducible as of 2025), openSUSE, Tails (fully reproducible ISOs since 2017), NixOS, and Guix, as well as build systems like Apache Maven, Meson, and the Linux kernel. The Reproducible Builds organization coordinates global efforts through summits, documentation, and tools like diffoscope for artifact comparison, with ongoing initiatives targeting 100% reproducibility by 2031 in key ecosystems.

Definition and Principles

Definition

Reproducible builds refer to a software build process in which, given the same source code, build environment, and build instructions, any party can recreate bit-by-bit identical copies of all specified output artifacts. This approach ensures that the resulting binaries or packages are verifiable through direct byte-level comparison, often using cryptographically secure hash functions to confirm identity.
A key distinction exists between source code reproducibility, which involves compiling the same source code under controlled conditions to produce identical binaries, and full supply chain reproducibility, which encompasses the entire process including fetched dependencies, versions, and environmental factors to achieve the same outcome. The goal is deterministic compilation, where consistent inputs lead to identical outputs without variation from non-deterministic elements like timestamps or hardware differences.
Examples of such outputs include compiled executables, distribution packages like Debian's .deb fileswhere byte-for-byte reproducibility is verified across multiple buildsand container images such as Docker images, which can be made identical to enable independent verification of their contents.

Core Principles

The core principle of determinism in reproducible builds requires that every step of the build process yields identical outputs when provided with the same inputs, thereby eliminating variability from sources such as random number generation, timestamps, and environment variables. This ensures that the resulting binaries are bit-for-bit identical across multiple invocations, building on the foundational definition of reproducibility as achieving exact matches in output artifacts. By enforcing determinism, developers can verify that no unintended modifications occur during compilation, fostering trust in the software supply chain.
Complementing determinism is the isolation principle, also known as hermeticity, which mandates that builds operate in a self-contained environment unaffected by the host system's state, such as the current date, user identifiers, or external network resources. Hermetic builds rely exclusively on explicitly defined inputs, tools, and dependencies, prohibiting external, uncontrolled factorsincluding access to the host machine's installed libraries or softwareand typically restricting network access during the build phase to prevent non-deterministic dependency fetching. This hermetic approach prevents leakage of machine-specific details into the output, avoiding "it works on my machine" issues, ensuring that the build process relies solely on explicitly declared dependencies and inputs. As a result, identical inputs always produce identical outputs, which enhances reproducibility for secure, verifiable software supply chains, while the restricted access improves security and makes the process easier to audit. The same source code can produce consistent results regardless of the build location or timing, enhancing portability and verifiability.
To achieve verifiable consistency, reproducible builds emphasize standardized ordering in data structures and the use of cryptographic hashing for output validation. File archives, for instance, must employ deterministic sorting to avoid variations from filesystem traversal orders, such as in tarballs where entries are processed sequentially rather than randomly. Cryptographic hashes, like SHA-256, then serve as a compact representation of the entire build output, allowing independent parties to confirm bit-for-bit identity by recomputing and comparing these digests. This hashing mechanism provides a robust foundation for integrity checks without requiring full binary redistribution.
At a theoretical level, these principles are supported by frameworks like Merkle trees, which model build dependencies as a hierarchical structure of hashes to track provenance and changes efficiently. In this abstraction, each node represents a hash of its childrenencompassing source files, intermediates, and configurationsenabling a single root hash to uniquely identify the entire dependency graph. This content-addressable approach facilitates high-level verification of build integrity and supports optimizations like incremental recomputation, while maintaining the isolation and determinism of the process.

Importance and Applications

Security and Verification Benefits

Reproducible builds enhance software security by enabling independent verification that distributed binaries precisely match those produced from the publicly available source code, thereby detecting tampering such as malware insertion during compilation or in the supply chain. This mechanism resists attacks where adversaries modify build processes to introduce subtle vulnerabilities, like a single bit flip creating a security hole, as highlighted in analyses of compiler backdoors. By allowing users or third parties to recompile the source and compare outputs, reproducible builds establish a verifiable chain of trust from human-readable code to machine-executable binaries, mitigating risks from compromised build environments.
A key benefit is crowdsourced verification, where diverse independent parties rebuild the software and compare resulting artifacts, reducing dependence on any single trusted builder and distributing the verification effort across a community. This approach democratizes security auditing, as participants can confirm the integrity of binaries without needing access to proprietary build pipelines. In practice, tools like Debian's reprotest automate this by constructing packages in varied virtual environmentssuch as different timezones, user IDs, or localesand checking for bit-for-bit matches, facilitating widespread adoption in projects like Debian's reproducible builds effort.
Cryptographic verification underpins these processes through the use of strong hashes, such as SHA-256, to assert bit-for-bit equivalence between independently built binaries, confirming no alterations occurred during distribution. This eliminates the need to cryptographically sign every artifact individually, as the reproducibility itself provides evidentiary proof of integrity, streamlining secure software dissemination while maintaining high assurance against undetected modifications.
In high-profile incidents like the 2016 Juniper Networks backdoor, where unauthorized code was inserted into ScreenOS firmware to enable VPN traffic decryption, reproducible builds could have aided detection by empowering independent rebuilds and hash comparisons against the distributed binaries, potentially exposing the supply chain compromise earlier. Similar principles apply to modern threats, such as the 2024 xz utils backdoor attempt, where altered build scripts introduced malicious code; reproducibility testing across environments would have flagged non-matching outputs, underscoring its role in preempting such attacks.

Broader Applications

Reproducible builds extend beyond security verification to enhance software development workflows, particularly in debugging and isolating issues. By ensuring that identical inputs produce identical outputs, developers can more effectively bisect regressions or build failures, pinpointing the exact changes responsible for discrepancies without interference from environmental variations. For instance, in the Rust ecosystem, tools like cargo-bisect-rustc leverage reproducible compilation to automate the identification of compiler regressions by testing against historical builds, streamlining the debugging process for contributors. This approach not only accelerates issue resolution but also fosters reliable collaboration in large-scale projects.
In regulatory contexts, reproducible builds support compliance with standards mandating verifiable software integrity, such as the U.S. Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140 series and the European Union's Cyber Resilience Act (CRA). Under FIPS, reproducible processes help maintain cryptographic module validation by confirming that binaries align with certified sources, reducing audit burdens and ensuring consistent integrity across deployments. Similarly, the CRA requires manufacturers to demonstrate secure development practices, including reproducible builds to verify that software products with digital elements meet cybersecurity obligations throughout their lifecycle. These capabilities enable organizations to meet legal requirements for transparency and accountability in software supply chains.
For containerized and cloud environments, reproducible builds ensure uniformity in image generation, critical for scalable deployments in microservices architectures and continuous integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD) pipelines. Docker, for example, supports reproducible builds through environment variables like SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH, which standardize timestamps and metadata, allowing teams to produce identical images regardless of build timing or host differences. This consistency mitigates deployment risks, such as runtime inconsistencies in cloud-native applications, and optimizes CI/CD efficiency by enabling predictable artifact sharing across distributed teams.
In open-source distribution, reproducible builds bolster community trust by permitting independent verification of released binaries against source code, a cornerstone for projects like Fedora's initiative. Fedora's effort aims to make nearly all RPM packages reproducible, allowing users to rebuild and compare outputs to confirm authenticity and detect potential tampering or errors in the distribution process. This practice has been adopted in major Linux distributions, promoting wider adoption and reliability in collaborative ecosystems.

Methods and Techniques

Standardizing Build Environments

Standardizing build environments is essential for reproducible builds, as it enforces the principle of isolation by ensuring that the same inputs produce identical outputs regardless of the host system. This involves creating controlled, consistent setups that encapsulate all necessary tools, libraries, and configurations, minimizing external influences that could introduce variability.
Containers and virtual machines provide a primary mechanism for achieving this standardization by encapsulating dependencies and isolating the build process from the host environment, thereby preventing pollution from pre-installed packages or system configurations. Tools such as Docker allow developers to define a complete build environment in a Dockerfile, starting from a specified base image and installing only required components, which ensures that builds run in identical conditions across different machines or CI systems. Similarly, Buildah enables the creation of container images without a daemon, facilitating rootless and secure builds that maintain consistency for reproducible outcomes. Build tools like Bazel enforce hermetic builds by treating build tools and dependencies as source code, managing them in controlled file trees, and isolating actions from host system changes, thereby eliminating host dependencies and ensuring reproducible outputs. Virtual machines, while more resource-intensive, offer stronger isolation for complex scenarios where container overhead is insufficient, such as cross-compilation tasks requiring specific kernel versions.
Dependency management further reinforces environmental consistency through techniques like pinning exact versions using lockfiles, which record the precise dependency tree to avoid resolution discrepancies over time or across environments. For JavaScript projects, npm's package-lock.json file captures the full dependency graph, including exact versions, sources, and integrity hashes, enabling npm ci to install an identical set of packages reproducibly. In Python ecosystems, requirements.txt files can include version pins and cryptographic hashes (e.g., --hash=sha256:...), allowing pip to verify and install dependencies deterministically, thus ensuring builds are secure and repeatable. For Java projects, tools such as Maven and Gradle can be configured to use local repositories instead of downloading dependencies during the build, preventing non-deterministic network fetches and supporting hermetic execution.
Clean slate builds eliminate variability from system packages by initiating the environment from minimal or empty bases, removing any inherited state from the host. In Docker, this is achieved by using lightweight base images like alpine or scratch, which contain only essential components, combined with multi-stage builds to discard temporary artifacts and produce a pristine final image. For Debian-based projects, chroot environments created with pbuilder provide a clean, isolated filesystem populated solely with build dependencies from the target distribution, ensuring no external influences affect the output.
A representative example of a standardized workflow is provided by Nix, which uses declarative specifications to define entire build environments reproducibly. In a Nix-based setup, developers create a shell.nix or flake.nix file that explicitly lists inputs such as package versions and sources, with nixpkgs pinned to a specific version for fixed inputs; for instance:
{ pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/21.11.tar.gz") {} }:

pkgs.mkShell {
 buildInputs = with pkgs; [
 gcc
 pkg-config
 openssl
 ];
}
Running nix-shell then instantiates this environment, downloading and configuring dependencies into an isolated sandbox without altering the host system. Subsequent builds with nix-build produce bit-identical results, as Nix hashes all inputsincluding the pinned nixpkgsand enforces purity in the derivation process. This approach allows teams to share environments via version control, facilitating collaboration and verification.

Addressing Non-Deterministic Factors

Non-deterministic factors within the build process, such as timestamps embedded in files or random number generation, can introduce variability that prevents identical outputs from the same source code. Addressing these requires targeted modifications to tools and build configurations to normalize or eliminate such elements, ensuring bit-for-bit reproducibility.
Timestamp normalization is a primary strategy, particularly for tools like gzip and tar that embed modification times in their outputs. The SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH environment variable standardizes this by setting a fixed Unix timestampoften 1 for builds without meaningful datesacross tools, overriding dynamic values derived from the build time or file metadata. For instance, gzip can be patched or configured to use this variable instead of the current time, while tar supports options like --mtime to enforce consistent timestamps in archives. Similarly, UID and GID normalization in archives prevents user-specific ownership from affecting outputs; tools like tar can be invoked with --numeric-owner or post-processed to set fixed values like 0 for root, ensuring metadata consistency regardless of the build environment.
Randomness control targets pseudo-random number generators (PRNGs) that may produce varying sequences due to unseeded or entropy-based initialization. The recommended approach is to seed PRNGs with a fixed, deterministic value, such as a constant or derived from SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH, or to disable randomness where possible. Such seeding ensures that any random-like inputs required during compilation or linking yield identical results.
Locale and path independence mitigate variations from user-specific settings or build directories. Build systems like Autotools can incorporate flags such as --enable-reproducible-builds to strip locale-dependent information from outputs and rewrite absolute paths to relative ones in debug symbols or binaries. This prevents differences arising from environment variables like LANG or the absolute build path, which compilers might embed in object files. For path handling, tools like GCC have patches to canonicalize source paths, ensuring that the same relative structure is used irrespective of the working directory.
For compression and archiving tools, deterministic modes eliminate order- or metadata-induced variability. The xz utility supports options like --check=crc32 and fixed block sizes to produce identical outputs from the same input, while ZIP tools require flags such as -X (omit extra fields) and directory sorting to avoid non-deterministic file ordering or timestamps. Post-build tools like strip-nondeterminism automate normalization for ZIP and JAR files by reordering entries and fixing metadata, commonly used in distributions to achieve reproducibility.

History and Development

Origins and Early Concepts

The concept of reproducible builds emerged from early discussions within the free software community during the 1990s, particularly around achieving deterministic compilation processes. Developers recognized that variations in build environments could lead to differing binary outputs from the same source code, prompting efforts to standardize compilation for consistency. In the GNU project, this idea was put into practice with tools developed in the early 1990s to support reproducible outputs across architectures.
The philosophical foundations of these technical pursuits were rooted in the open-source movement's emphasis on transparency and verifiability. Richard Stallman's 1985 GNU Manifesto advocated for the distribution of software source code to enable users to study, modify, and redistribute it, providing a framework that prioritized user empowerment through accessible and inspectable software artifacts.
Formal academic attention to software integrity and verification began to coalesce in the early 2000s, building on prior security engineering principles.
Preceding organized projects, late-1990s academic research on software integrity focused on cryptographic methods to prove unaltered distribution of code. Such approaches underscored the potential for verification in maintaining software trustworthiness.

Key Milestones and Projects

The Reproducible Builds project emerged in the 2010s as a collaborative initiative driven by internet freedom activists, with its formal launch in 2013 focused on auditing and enhancing the reproducibility of Debian packages. This effort began with initial patches to Debian's dpkg tool in August 2013, enabling the first reproducible build of the hello package and setting the stage for broader adoption across free software ecosystems.
Early milestones included the development of Gitian in 2011 for Bitcoin to enable verifiable builds, and in 2013, the Tor Browser achieved reproducibility, influencing Debian's efforts at DebConf13.
A major milestone came with Debian 12 (Bookworm), where the essential and required package sets achieved 100% reproducibility on the amd64 and arm64 architectures in August 2022, marking a significant verification advancement for the distribution's core components. Efforts have continued, with Debian targeting full reproducibility in its upcoming Debian 14 release expected in 2025.
Other Linux distributions have progressively adopted reproducible builds. Arch Linux initiated partial adoption in 2015 through community-driven efforts, reaching approximately 80-90% reproducibility for its packages by the mid-2020s via tools like embedded .BUILDINFO files in pacman. Fedora established a formal goal of 99% reproducible package builds, integrating it as an expectation for maintainers and leveraging infrastructure changes to support independent verification.
Beyond distributions, cross-project integrations have amplified the impact. The Tor Project incorporated reproducible builds into its browser bundle starting in 2013, enabling users to independently verify binaries against source code to counter potential supply-chain compromises. Similarly, Bitcoin Core has employed reproducible builds since the mid-2010s to facilitate wallet verification, allowing anyone to compile identical binaries from the MIT-licensed source for enhanced trust in the software's integrity.
Recent developments include the 2024 Hamburg summit, which fostered collaboration on supply-chain security through workshops and tool development.

Challenges and Solutions

Technical Challenges

One major technical challenge in achieving reproducible builds stems from compiler non-determinism, particularly influenced by operating system features like Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR). ASLR randomizes the base addresses of executable segments in memory to enhance security, but this can lead to variability in compiler outputs, such as differing debug information or uninitialized memory reads during compilation in tools like GCC and Clang. For instance, in Linux environments, ASLR may cause inconsistent binary outputs across builds even with identical source code and flags, as the randomized layout affects how the compiler accesses or embeds memory-dependent data.
Dependency fetching introduces further variability, especially in ecosystems like Java's Maven, where repositories and mirrors can serve inconsistent content over time. Mirrors may return different versions of the same dependency artifact due to caching, updates, or resolution order, leading to non-reproducible binaries; a documented case involved the commons-collections library fetching version 3.2.1 (vulnerable to a CVE) in one build environment and 3.2.2 (patched) in another, solely due to mirror differences without changes to the pom.xml. This issue is exacerbated by dynamic downloads during builds, where network-dependent fetches from Maven Central or proxies introduce timestamps or metadata variations not controlled by the build script.
Multi-platform portability poses significant hurdles due to architectural differences, such as endianness and floating-point precision variations between systems like x86 and ARM. Endianness affects byte ordering in multi-byte data types, including floating-point representations, requiring explicit handling in bit-wise operations to avoid discrepancies in serialized or embedded data across little-endian (e.g., x86) and big-endian (e.g., some ARM configurations) architectures. Floating-point arithmetic, governed by IEEE 754, exhibits non-associativity in operations like additionwhere (a + b) + c a + (b + c) due to rounding errorsamplifying differences in reduction sums or transcendental functions across platforms, as libraries may implement varying semantics without standardization. While well-defined IEEE operations yield identical results on x86 and ARM, undefined behaviors (e.g., overflow handling) can diverge, complicating bit-for-bit reproducibility in portable applications.
Emerging challenges since 2023 involve integrating AI-generated code and machine learning (ML) model builds, where non-determinism from training data and stochastic processes undermines reproducibility. In ML pipelines, training involves random weight initialization, data subsampling, and stochastic optimizers like SGD, leading to varying model weights and outputs even with fixed seeds, as hardware differences (e.g., GPU floating-point precision on x86 vs. ARM) propagate errors through billions of operations. For AI-generated code, large language models (LLMs) introduce variability in outputs due to inherent model non-determinism, making it difficult to pin down exact code artifacts for subsequent builds, particularly in automated pipelines where generated code feeds into compilation. These issues highlight a growing gap in traditional reproducible build practices, as training data provenance and environmental stochasticity resist deterministic capture.

Organizational and Practical Hurdles

Implementing reproducible builds imposes significant resource demands, particularly in terms of computational infrastructure and time required for verification. Projects like Debian rely on extensive continuous integration (CI) setups, such as the reprotest tool, which performs multiple builds in varied environments (e.g., via SSH, QEMU, or LXC) to detect non-determinism, necessitating substantial hardware and bandwidth for ongoing testing across thousands of packages. This resource intensity often strains smaller teams or open-source initiatives, where funding for dedicated CI grids is limited, leading to slower progress despite motivated contributors.
Adoption faces skill and coordination challenges, especially in large-scale or proprietary software environments, where cross-team collaboration is essential but frequently lacking. In proprietary settings, developers must align with upstream vendors and internal stakeholders to patch non-deterministic elements, but poor communication and differing priorities hinder upstream acceptance of fixes, as noted by 11 out of 17 surveyed experts. Businesses in primary and secondary software sectors report technical coordination as a key barrier, with only selective implementation due to the need for specialized expertise in build systems and supply chain security.
Retrofitting legacy codebases for reproducibility presents additional practical hurdles, requiring extensive audits and modifications that disrupt existing workflows. For instance, in the Android ecosystem, despite ongoing efforts by communities like F-Droid to enable verifiable builds for open-source apps, broader adoption remains slow due to the complexity of integrating deterministic practices into mature, multi-vendor codebases spanning millions of lines. This backward compatibility issue is compounded in proprietary Android derivatives, where closed-source components resist full verification without vendor cooperation.
The absence of standardized metrics further complicates measurement and progress tracking, making it difficult to benchmark adoption across projects. While major Linux distributions have achieved varying coverageDebian at approximately 95% for its unstable branch, Fedora at around 90%, and Arch Linux at 86% as of late 2025comparisons are inconsistent due to differing definitions of "reproducible" and testing scopes. These figures highlight incremental gains but underscore the need for unified evaluation frameworks to quantify impact and drive wider implementation.

References

Definitions reproducible-builds.org

Reproducible Builds a set of software development practices that ...

The history, status, and plans for reproducible builds - LWN.net

History reproducible-builds.org

Docs reproducible-builds.org

ReproducibleBuilds - Debian Wiki

System images reproducible-builds.org

Why reproducible builds?

Commandments of reproducible builds

http://www.dwheeler.com/trusting-trust/

Merkle trees and build systems - LWN.net

Tools reproducible-builds.org

Frequently Asked Questions - SLSA

Researchers Solve Juniper Backdoor Mystery; Signs Point to NSA

How NixOS and reproducible builds could have detected the xz ...

Bisecting Rust Compiler Regressions with cargo-bisect-rustc | Inside ...

FIPS 140-2 Explained: The engineer's guide to compliance

EU Cyber Resilience Act Compliance - Sherlocked Security

Reproducible builds - Docker Docs

Fedora Reproducible Builds

Developer best practices: Reproducible builds - Internet Computer

package-lock.json - npm Docs

Base images - Docker Docs

ReproducibleBuilds/Howto - Debian Wiki

Timestamps reproducible-builds.org

SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH reproducible-builds.org

ReproducibleBuilds/TimestampsInGzipHeaders - Debian Wiki

Archive metadata reproducible-builds.org

Randomness reproducible-builds.org

Enable reproducible builds with SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH

Build path reproducible-builds.org

The GNU Manifesto - GNU Project - Free Software Foundation

Success stories reproducible-builds.org

Changes/Package builds are expected to be reproducible

Deterministic Builds Part One: Cyberwar and Global Compromise

Bitcoin Core :: Download

Taking the next step: OSS-Fuzz in 2023 - Google Online Security Blog

Hamburg 2024 reproducible-builds.org

mitigating non-determinism - reproducible-builds

ASLR introduces non-determinism Issue #359 - GitHub

The Surprising Pitfalls of Maven Environments and Reproducibility

JVM reproducible-builds.org

 Designing Bit-Reproducible Portable High-Performance Applications

Understand floating-point behavior across x86 and Arm architectures

Challenges of reproducible AI in biomedical data science

Solving Reproducibility Challenges in Deep Learning and LLMs

 On the Importance and Challenges of Reproducible Builds for ...

On business adoption and use of reproducible builds for open and ...

Reproducible Builds - Free and Open Source Android App Repository

Reproducible Builds: Increasing the Integrity of Software Supply ...

Overview of various statistics about reproducible builds

Arch Linux Reproducible Status

Hermeticity | Bazel
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion