Round-robin scheduling Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Round-robin scheduling
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Round-robin scheduling is one of the algorithms employed by schedulers in computing to fairly allocate a shared resource among multiple entities in a cyclic manner, such as CPU time to processes in operating systems or bandwidth to packets in networks. In the context of operating systems, it is a preemptive CPU scheduling algorithm commonly used in multitasking and time-sharing systems. Each process in the ready queue is given a fixed, small unit of CPU time, known as a time quantum or time slicetypically on the order of 10 to 100 millisecondsand processes are executed in a strict cyclic order. If a process completes its execution or blocks (e.g., for I/O) before the quantum expires, the scheduler moves to the next process; otherwise, the current process is preempted at the end of the quantum and requeued, ensuring no single process monopolizes the CPU.
The algorithm relies on a ready queue implemented as a FIFO structure, where arriving processes join the end of the queue, and the scheduler cycles through them sequentially. This mechanism promotes responsiveness in interactive environments by providing bounded waiting times, making it ideal for systems supporting multiple users or concurrent tasks. Round-robin was among the first scheduling methods developed for time-shared systems in the early 1960s, with early analyses appearing in foundational work on multiprogramming. Beyond operating systems, it is also used in network packet scheduling and load balancing to ensure equitable resource distribution.
Key advantages of round-robin scheduling include its simplicity, which leads to low implementation overhead, and its prevention of starvation since every process eventually receives CPU time as long as the quantum is finite. It excels in time-sharing scenarios by delivering consistent response times without indefinite delays. However, drawbacks arise from the frequent context switches required, especially with small quanta, which can consume significant CPU resources and degrade performance if the overhead exceeds useful computation. Additionally, it does not optimize for processes with highly variable burst lengths, potentially leading to longer average waiting times compared to non-preemptive algorithms like shortest-job-first.

Fundamentals

Definition

Round-robin scheduling is a preemptive CPU scheduling algorithm in which each ready process or task is allocated a fixed, small unit of time, known as a time quantum or time slice, and executed in a cyclic order from a ready queue. This ensures fair sharing of the processor among competing entities without favoring any based on priority, making it suitable for time-sharing environments where multiple users or tasks require equitable access.
Key terms in round-robin scheduling include the time quantum, a predefined duration (typically 10-100 milliseconds) that limits how long a process runs before being preempted; context switching, the overhead-intensive mechanism of saving the state of the current process (such as registers and program counter) and restoring the state of the next process from the queue; and cyclic execution, where processes are serviced in a fixed sequence, returning to the beginning of the queue once all have been given their turn, preventing indefinite waiting for any one process. These elements collectively promote responsiveness in interactive systems by interleaving execution without inherent differentiation by process length or arrival time.
The algorithm originated in the early time-sharing systems of the 1960s, designed to support multiple simultaneous users on a single computer, contrasting with batch processing's sequential execution. It was first implemented in the Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) at MIT, demonstrated in November 1961 on a modified IBM 709 and detailed in a 1962 publication, where a simple round-robin sequence ran user programs in short computational bursts to enhance human-computer interaction.
A basic implementation of round-robin scheduling can be represented in pseudocode using a FIFO queue for ready processes:
initialize ready_queue as empty queue
quantum = fixed_time_slice // e.g., 100 ms

while there are processes to schedule:
 enqueue arriving processes to ready_queue
 
 if ready_queue is not empty:
 current_process = dequeue(ready_queue)
 execute current_process for up to quantum time units
 
 if current_process not completed:
 enqueue current_process to ready_queue // requeue for next turn
 
 perform (/page/Context_switch) if necessary
This structure highlights the cyclic nature, with enqueuing and dequeuing operations ensuring fairness. Round-robin scheduling finds applications in process management within operating systems and packet handling in networks, as explored in subsequent sections.

Principles of Operation

Round-robin scheduling operates by maintaining a ready queue structured as a first-in, first-out (FIFO) queue, where ready tasks are enqueued in the order of their arrival, ensuring a cyclic execution order. When a task becomes ready for execution, it is added to the tail of this queue. The scheduler selects the task at the head of the queue and allocates it a fixed unit of CPU time known as the time quantum, typically ranging from 10 to 100 milliseconds in modern systems. The task executes until either it completes its current burst, voluntarily yields the CPU (e.g., due to an I/O request), or the quantum expires, at which point the scheduler preempts it if unfinished and moves it to the tail of the ready queue, allowing the next task to proceed. This preemptive mechanism ensures no single task monopolizes the CPU, promoting fairness through equal time slices among all ready tasks.
The handling of I/O-bound and CPU-bound tasks in round-robin scheduling arises from their differing CPU burst patterns within the quantum. I/O-bound tasks, which require short CPU bursts interspersed with longer I/O waits, often complete their burst before the quantum expires or yield early, allowing them to return to the queue after I/O completion and potentially receive another turn sooner, effectively gaining more frequent access relative to their needs. In contrast, CPU-bound tasks, characterized by long CPU bursts, typically consume the full quantum before preemption, remaining in the queue longer between turns but still receiving equal quantum allocations, which can lead to them accumulating more overall wait time compared to I/O-bound tasks. This behavior inherently favors responsive execution for interactive or I/O-intensive workloads without explicit prioritization.
The selection of the time quantum size critically influences the algorithm's efficiency and performance characteristics. A quantum that is too small results in frequent preemptions, leading to excessive context switch overheadwhere saving and restoring process states consumes a significant portion of CPU time, potentially up to several microseconds per switchthus reducing overall throughput. Conversely, a quantum that is too large approximates first-come, first-served (FCFS) scheduling, where short tasks experience prolonged waits behind long-running ones, diminishing the benefits of preemption and fairness. Optimal quantum selection balances these trade-offs, often set to be at least 100 times the context switch time to minimize overhead while preserving responsiveness, as guided by empirical system tuning.

Applications in Computing

Process Scheduling

Round-robin scheduling is widely employed in multiprogramming operating systems such as Unix and Linux to ensure fair allocation of CPU time among competing processes, preventing any single process from monopolizing the processor in time-sharing environments. In these systems, the scheduler cycles through ready processes, granting each a fixed time quantum (typically 10-100 milliseconds) before preempting and moving to the next, which supports interactive use by providing responsive execution without indefinite blocking.
A classic illustration of round-robin scheduling involves three processesP1 with a burst time of 24 ms, P2 with 3 ms, and P3 with 3 msall arriving at time 0, using a time quantum of 4 ms. The execution proceeds as follows in the Gantt chart:
| P1 | P2 | P3 | P1 | P1 | P1 | P1 | P1 |
0 4 7 10 14 18 22 26 30
P2 completes at 7 ms after its full burst, P3 completes at 10 ms after its full burst, and P1 completes at 30 ms after six quanta (the last being partial at 4 ms remaining). Turnaround time for each process is calculated as completion time minus arrival time (0 ms), yielding 30 ms for P1, 7 ms for P2, and 10 ms for P3; the average turnaround time is (30 + 7 + 10) / 3 = 15.67 ms. Waiting time is turnaround time minus burst time, resulting in 6 ms for P1, 4 ms for P2, and 7 ms for P3; the average waiting time is (6 + 4 + 7) / 3 = 5.67 ms.
In modern operating systems, round-robin principles persist through evolved mechanisms. Since Linux kernel 6.6 (released October 2023), the Earliest Eligible Virtual Deadline First (EEVDF) scheduler has replaced the Completely Fair Scheduler (CFS) as the default for normal-priority tasks, achieving RR-like fairness by tracking virtual deadlines and lag for each task via a red-black tree, selecting the task with the earliest eligible virtual deadline for execution to proportionally allocate CPU shares based on nice values, approximating equal quanta for equal-priority tasks. Additionally, Linux supports the explicit SCHED_RR policy for real-time processes, enforcing strict round-robin cycling within priority levels. Windows employs priority-based preemptive scheduling with time-slicing in a round-robin manner among threads of the same priority, assigning quanta (around 20 ms for foreground processes) to balance responsiveness and throughput.

Thread and Task Scheduling

Round-robin scheduling extends to kernel threads in operating systems adhering to POSIX standards, where the SCHED_RR policy assigns fixed time quanta to threads of equal priority, cycling through them to allocate CPU time fairly. In Linux, for instance, SCHED_RR applies to POSIX threads (pthreads), preempting a thread after its quantum expires and placing it at the end of the ready queue for its priority level, ensuring responsive execution in multi-threaded applications. This mechanism supports kernel-level concurrency by treating threads as lightweight units within processes, allowing the scheduler to manage intra-process parallelism without full process overhead.
At the user level, round-robin principles appear in task schedulers for languages like Java and Go, where threads or lightweight tasks (goroutines) are cycled through to maintain fairness. In Java, threads of the same priority are typically scheduled in a round-robin manner by the host operating system, continuing execution until they yield, sleep, or block, which promotes balanced resource use in concurrent programs. Go's runtime scheduler employs an augmented round-robin policy with work-stealing, assigning goroutines to processor queues and rotating them to avoid long-running tasks dominating execution, enabling efficient handling of thousands of concurrent tasks in a single process.
Compared to process-level round-robin, thread scheduling incurs lower context switch costs because threads within the same process share address space, virtual memory, and file descriptors, reducing the overhead of saving and restoring state during switches. This efficiency makes thread round-robin suitable for cooperative multitasking environments, where threads voluntarily yield control at safe points rather than relying solely on strict preemption, minimizing disruptions in user-space concurrency models.
In a multi-threaded server, round-robin scheduling can distribute request-handling threads across CPU cores, with the quantum tuned to balance responsiveness and throughputfor example, a 10-50 ms slice ensures quick alternation between threads processing incoming connections without excessive switching overhead. This approach maintains low latency for client requests in high-concurrency scenarios, such as web servers managing multiple simultaneous sessions.
In real-time systems, round-robin is applied to non-critical threads to guarantee liveness and prevent starvation among equal-priority tasks, as the cyclic allocation ensures each thread receives periodic CPU access without indefinite blocking by peers. For instance, under SCHED_RR, background or utility threads in embedded or RTOS environments cycle through quanta, allowing critical tasks to preempt while preserving fairness for non-urgent operations like logging or monitoring.

Applications in Networking and Distributed Systems

Packet Scheduling

In packet scheduling, round-robin (RR) is utilized in routers and switches to fairly allocate bandwidth among multiple network flows by cyclically serving packets from dedicated queues. This approach classifies incoming packets into separate queues based on flow identifiers, such as source-destination IP pairs or TCP connections, and then dequeues and transmits one packet from each non-empty queue in a fixed order before returning to the first queue. By limiting each flow to one packet per round, RR prevents bandwidth starvation and approximates the fairness of ideal bit-by-bit round-robin service without requiring complex per-bit emulation.
A practical example occurs in a router managing packets from several TCP flows sharing an outgoing link. If three active flows arrive, the RR scheduler transmits the head-of-line packet from flow 1, then flow 2, then flow 3, repeating the cycle until the queues are empty or new packets arrive; this ensures no single TCP flow, such as a bulk transfer, dominates the link, promoting equitable sharing even under varying traffic loads. This mechanism draws from the general cyclic service principle of RR, adapted here to discrete packet units rather than continuous time slices.
Implementations of RR appear in network protocols and hardware, including simplified forms within the TCP/IP stack for outgoing packet selection on multi-flow interfaces and in Ethernet switches for arbitrating access to output ports from multiple input queues. In switches, RR cycles through queued packets from different virtual output queues to avoid head-of-line blocking and ensure balanced port utilization. However, basic RR treats all packets equally regardless of size, which introduces potential unfairness: a flow emitting large packets (e.g., 1500-byte MTU frames) receives disproportionately more bytes per round than one sending small packets (e.g., 64-byte acknowledgments), leading to byte-level inequity despite packet-level equality.

Load Balancing and DNS

In distributed systems, round-robin scheduling is commonly applied in server farms to distribute incoming requests, such as HTTP requests or database queries, across multiple backend servers in a cyclic manner, ensuring even workload distribution and preventing any single server from becoming a bottleneck. This approach is particularly useful in web architectures where a load balancer acts as the entry point, forwarding each new connection or request to the next available server in the rotation, thereby promoting scalability and reliability in handling high volumes of traffic.
DNS round-robin represents an early and simple form of load balancing at the domain name resolution level, where multiple IP addresses (A records) are associated with a single domain name, and the DNS server rotates the order of these addresses in responses to client queries, effectively distributing client connections across servers. This technique has been a standard feature of DNS implementations since the protocol's early development in the 1980s, providing a lightweight method for fault tolerance and basic load distribution without requiring specialized hardware. However, it operates independently of actual server load, as clients may cache resolutions, potentially leading to uneven distribution over time.
For instance, in a web server cluster consisting of three nodes with IP addresses 192.0.2.1, 192.0.2.2, and 192.0.2.3, a load balancer employing round-robin would direct the first client request to 192.0.2.1, the second to 192.0.2.2, the third to 192.0.2.3, and then cycle back to 192.0.2.1 for the fourth, thereby avoiding overload on any one node and maintaining consistent response times across the farm.
In contemporary cloud environments, round-robin remains a foundational algorithm in services like Amazon Web Services' Elastic Load Balancing (ELB), where it serves as the default routing policy for distributing traffic across healthy targets in an Application Load Balancer, augmented by periodic health checks to deregister unresponsive servers and ensure requests are only sent to operational instances. This integration allows for dynamic scaling in large-scale deployments while preserving the simplicity of the core round-robin mechanism.

Variants

Weighted Round-robin

Weighted round-robin (WRR) is a scheduling algorithm that extends the basic round-robin approach by allocating service quanta or slots to tasks, processes, or queues in proportion to predefined weights, enabling differentiated treatment based on priority or resource requirements. This allows higher-weighted entities to receive a larger share of the total resources, such as CPU time or bandwidth, while maintaining fairness relative to their assigned ratios.
In operation, the scheduler traverses the set of entities in a cyclic manner, serving each one for a number of consecutive quanta equal to its weight during each full round. For instance, with three tasks assigned weights of 1, 2, and 3 respectively, the scheduler allocates 1 quantum to the first task, 2 quanta to the second, and 3 quanta to the third before returning to the beginning of the cycle. This mechanism ensures that over multiple cycles, the service distribution approximates the weight proportions, providing bandwidth or time-slice proportionality without complex per-packet calculations.
WRR finds prominent applications in network quality of service (QoS) frameworks, particularly in Differentiated Services (DiffServ) architectures, where it schedules packets across queues to enforce bandwidth guarantees for diverse traffic classes like voice or data streams. It is also widely adopted in load balancing systems for distributing incoming requests to backend servers with varying capacities, such as in reliable server pooling environments, where weights reflect server performance differences to optimize throughput and response times.
A representative example involves two network flows with weights 1 and 2. The scheduler dequeues and serves one packet from the first flow, followed by two packets from the second flow, repeating this sequence indefinitely to deliver approximately twice the bandwidth to the higher-weighted flow.

Deficit Round-robin

Deficit round-robin (DRR) is a scheduling algorithm that extends basic round-robin by incorporating a deficit counter for each flow to handle variable-length packets more equitably in network environments. Each flow maintains a fixed quantum representing its share of service and a deficit counter that tracks accumulated service credits or deficits from previous rounds. This mechanism allows flows to borrow from future quanta if they have unused credits, promoting byte-level fairness rather than packet-level allocation.
The primary purpose of DRR is to mitigate the unfairness inherent in standard round-robin scheduling when packet sizes vary significantly, where small-packet flows might receive disproportionately less bandwidth than large-packet flows. By carrying over the deficit counter across rounds, DRR approximates the ideal behavior of fluid fair queuing, where bandwidth is allocated continuously in proportion to weights, ensuring that no flow exceeds its entitled share by more than the maximum packet size while minimizing underutilization. This results in a fairness index close to 1, with low computational overhead of O(1) per packet.
The algorithm operates as follows: Initialize each flow with a quantum $ Q $ (typically proportional to its weight) and deficit counter $ D = 0 $. Maintain a circular list of active (non-empty) flows. In each round, select the next flow in the list. If the flow's queue is empty, skip to the next flow. Otherwise, update the deficit by adding the quantum: $ D \leftarrow D + Q $. Then, while the queue is non-empty and $ D \geq L $ (where $ L $ is the size of the head packet), dequeue and transmit the packet, then subtract: $ D \leftarrow D - L $. If no packet fits after adding $ Q $, defer the flow by moving it to the end of the list without transmitting, carrying over the updated $ D $ (which remains positive) to its next turn. This process repeats, allowing multiple packets to be sent in one turn if they fit within the available credit and ensuring large packets accumulate sufficient credit over multiple rounds without starving other flows.
DRR finds application in high-speed routers for packet scheduling, where it provides efficient, hardware-implementable fair queuing without the complexity of per-flow timestamping in ideal algorithms. It is notably integrated into the Linux kernel's traffic control framework as the DRR queuing discipline (tc-drr), serving as a classful scheduler that replaces stochastic fairness queuing for more precise bandwidth allocation among classes. Enhancements such as DRR++ build on this foundation to address latency issues in mixed traffic scenarios, incorporating mechanisms like earliest deadline first integration to bound delays for latency-critical flows while preserving fairness.

Analysis and Performance

Advantages

Round-robin scheduling ensures fairness by allocating equal time slices to each ready task or process, preventing any single entity from monopolizing resources and thereby avoiding starvation. This equitable distribution guarantees that every participant receives periodic access to the CPU in operating systems or to network links in packet scheduling, promoting balanced resource utilization across multiple users or jobs. In time-sharing environments, this approach splits CPU time evenly, making it particularly suitable for multi-user systems where impartiality is essential.
The algorithm excels in responsiveness, especially for interactive applications, by delivering low response times to short tasks through its preemptive nature and small time quanta. In operating systems, a modest quantumtypically on the order of 10-100 millisecondsallows quick context switches, enabling users to perceive near-immediate feedback in systems like terminals or graphical interfaces. This property is advantageous in networking contexts, such as load balancing, where it helps maintain low latency for incoming requests by cycling through servers without prolonged waits.
Implementation simplicity is a core strength of round-robin scheduling, relying on a straightforward first-in, first-out (FIFO) queue to manage ready tasks with minimal overhead when quanta are equal. This design requires no complex priority calculations or burst time predictions, making it efficient for resource-constrained systems and easy to integrate into kernels or network protocols. In distributed environments, such as DNS round-robin for load distribution, the algorithm's basic cyclic assignment reduces development and maintenance costs.
Finally, round-robin provides deterministic behavior, offering predictable resource sharing that aids in system design and performance forecasting. The fixed cycling through the queue ensures consistent service intervals, which is valuable in time-sharing setups for budgeting CPU allocation and in networking for stable throughput under varying loads. This predictability supports reliable operation in environments requiring bounded delays, such as real-time simulations or balanced server farms.

Disadvantages

Round-robin scheduling exhibits inefficiency when processes have varying burst times, as longer-running processes require multiple time quanta to complete, thereby delaying shorter processes that could otherwise finish more promptly; this phenomenon, known as the convoy effect, becomes particularly pronounced when the time quantum is large, mimicking the behavior of first-come, first-served scheduling. In such scenarios, the average waiting time for short-burst processes increases significantly, leading to suboptimal overall system throughput for workloads with mixed job sizes.
A key limitation arises from the overhead associated with frequent context switches, especially when the time quantum is set too small; in these cases, the CPU spends a disproportionate amount of time switching between processes rather than executing them, reducing effective utilization. Proper tuning of the time quantum is thus critical, but achieving an optimal value remains challenging, as a quantum that is too large reduces responsiveness, while one that is too small amplifies switching costs.
Round-robin scheduling is particularly unsuitable for real-time systems, where tasks often have strict deadlines, because it allocates CPU time equally without considering priority or completion guarantees, potentially leading to missed deadlines and system failures. This equal treatment can result in higher context switch rates and prolonged waiting times for time-critical tasks, making it inefficient for embedded or hard real-time environments that require predictable response times.
In networking applications, such as packet scheduling, round-robin can lead to unfair bandwidth allocation when packets vary in size, as flows with larger packets receive disproportionately more service compared to those with smaller ones, violating fairness principles. This issue arises because the algorithm services entire packets in fixed turns without accounting for size differences, potentially starving smaller-packet flows and degrading performance in heterogeneous traffic scenarios.

Mathematical Formulation and Comparisons

Time Complexity and Metrics

Round-robin scheduling achieves constant time complexity, specifically O(1), for each scheduling decision when implemented with an efficient data structure such as a circular queue, where enqueue and dequeue operations are amortized constant time.
Key performance metrics for round-robin scheduling include waiting time, turnaround time, response time, throughput, and CPU utilization. Turnaround time $ T $ for a process is defined as the completion time minus its arrival time, $ T = C - A $, where $ C $ is the completion time and $ A $ is the arrival time, encompassing both execution and waiting periods. Total waiting time is the time spent in the ready queue (turnaround time minus burst time) and lacks a simple closed-form expression, requiring simulation or Gantt chart analysis for exact values with arbitrary burst times. Response time, the time from arrival to first CPU allocation, has a worst-case bound of $ (n-1)q $ (where $ n $ is the number of concurrent processes and $ q $ the quantum) and, for simultaneous arrivals, an average of $ \frac{(n-1)q}{2} $ assuming uniform positioning in the initial cycle; for processes with equal burst times much larger than $ q $, the cyclic nature ensures bounded initial response but total waiting time approximates processor sharing behavior.
Throughput in round-robin scheduling represents the rate of process completion, calculated as the number of processes finished per unit time, which approaches the CPU's processing capacity when the quantum is appropriately tuned relative to burst times. CPU utilization $ U $ accounts for overhead from context switches and is given by $ U = 1 - \frac{t_{cs}}{q} $, where $ t_{cs} $ is the context switch time, assuming switches occur after each quantum; more precisely, $ U = \frac{q}{q + t_{cs}} $ when overhead is explicitly modeled per cycle.

Comparisons with Other Algorithms

Round-robin (RR) scheduling addresses key limitations of first-come, first-served (FCFS) by preempting long-running processes, thereby reducing average waiting times for short jobs that would otherwise be delayed by the convoy effect in FCFS, where a single long process holds up subsequent arrivals. For instance, consider three processes arriving simultaneously with CPU burst times of 24, 3, and 3 units: under FCFS, the average waiting time is 17 units due to the long process blocking the shorts, whereas RR with a time quantum of 4 units yields an average waiting time of 17/3 5.67 units by interleaving execution. However, this preemption in RR introduces additional context-switching overhead absent in the simpler, non-preemptive FCFS.
Compared to shortest job first (SJF), which is non-preemptive and achieves the minimal possible average waiting time by prioritizing shorter bursts, RR offers greater fairness by ensuring no process is indefinitely postponed, though this comes at the expense of higher overall average waiting times since RR does not optimize for burst lengths. SJF excels in batch systems with known burst times, minimizing waits to theoretical optima (e.g., average wait of 3 units in the above example), but it risks starving longer jobs if shorts continually arrive; RR mitigates this through equal time slices but performs worse on average wait metrics in static scenarios.
In contrast to priority scheduling, where processes are ordered by assigned priorities and low-priority tasks may starve if higher ones persist, RR inherently avoids starvation by cycling through all ready processes equally, providing bounded response times regardless of relative importance. Priority scheduling better suits environments with critical real-time tasks requiring immediate execution (e.g., high-priority interrupts), but without mechanisms like aging, it can lead to indefinite low-priority waits; RR's egalitarian approach ensures progress for all but may delay urgent high-priority work.
AlgorithmFairnessAverage Response TimeOverhead (Context Switches)
Round-RobinHigh (equal shares)Good for interactive/short jobsHigh due to frequent preemption
FCFSLow (convoy effect)Poor for later/short jobsLow (non-preemptive)
SJFLow (long jobs starve)Optimal average waitMedium (selection overhead)
PriorityVariable (depends on aging)Excellent for high-priorityLow (but starvation risk)

References

Operating Systems: CPU Scheduling

Process Scheduling

 Scheduling: Introduction - cs.wisc.edu

An experimental time-sharing system | Proceedings of the May 1-3 ...

An Experimental Time-Sharing System - MIT

Operating Systems: CPU Scheduling

 CPU Scheduling II - University at Buffalo

 Scheduling Processes - LASS

CMSC 412 - Sample Midterm Solutions

Lecture 5 (Scheduling) - andrew.cmu.ed

 CSC 453 Operating Systems - Lecture 5 : Process Scheduling

 Process Scheduling - Texas Computer Science

Traditional UNIX Scheduling - Wisemonkeys

Round Robin Scheduling Algorithm | Studytonight

Round Robin (RR) Scheduling Algorithm - Tutorials Point

Round Robin Scheduling in Operating System - GeeksforGeeks

CFS: Completely fair process scheduling in Linux - Opensource.com

sched(7) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Scheduling Priorities - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Threads

Thread Scheduling (Multithreaded Programming Guide)

Scheduling and Priority - Learning Java, 4th Edition - O'Reilly

 Analysis of the Go runtime scheduler - CS@Columbia

 CPU Scheduling - Stanford Secure Computer Systems Group

Implementing simple cooperative threads in C - Stephen Brennan

https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3129676.3129736

Chapter 7. Scheduling policies for RHEL for Real Time

6.2 Queuing Disciplines - Computer Networks: A Systems Approach

23 Queuing and Scheduling - An Introduction to Computer Networks

 A new scheduling algorithm for server farms load balancing - arXiv

Load Balancer - Managed Servers - Cornell University

What is round-robin DNS? - Cloudflare

A Brief History of the DNS and BIND

DNS Round Robin Load Balancing - Kemp Technologies

How Elastic Load Balancing works - AWS Documentation

Health checks for Application Load Balancer target groups

RFC 7806 - On Queuing, Marking, and Dropping - IETF Datatracker

RFC 5356 - Reliable Server Pooling Policies - IETF Datatracker

RFC 2474 - in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers - IETF Datatracker

Efficient fair queueing using deficit round robin - ACM Digital Library

tc-drr(8) - Linux manual page - man7.org

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1024247

Scheduling - Stanford University

The efficiency-fairness balance of Round Robin scheduling

Operating Systems Lecture Notes Lecture 6 CPU Scheduling

Chapter Five -- CPU Scheduling -- Lecture Notes - Computer Science

Scheduling Algorithms - OSDev Wiki

 Task Scheduling

Scheduling - CS 341

 CPU Scheduling

 Efficient Fair Queuing Using Deficit Round-Robin - Stanford University

 Virtual-Time Round-Robin: An O(1) Proportional Share Scheduler

 Discussion 4: Scheduling - CS 162

 Chapter 6: CPU Scheduling - FSU Computer Science

Scheduler

CS 111: Lecture 8 Scribe Notes

 on Scheduling Algorithms! - LASS

 CPU Scheduling - Stanford Secure Computer Systems Group
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion