scikit-learn Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 8 days ago 
scikit-learn
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Scikit-learn is an open-source machine learning library for the Python programming language, providing simple and efficient tools for predictive data analysis that are accessible to everybody and reusable in various contexts. It features a wide array of supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms, including support vector machines, random forests, gradient boosting, k-means clustering, principal component analysis (PCA), and dimensionality reduction techniques, all built on top of the NumPy, SciPy, and matplotlib libraries to ensure high performance and consistency. Designed with an emphasis on ease of use, clean and uniform application programming interfaces (APIs), and extensive documentation, scikit-learn supports tasks such as classification, regression, clustering, model selection, and preprocessing, making it a cornerstone for both academic research and industrial applications in data science.
Originally initiated in 2007 as a Google Summer of Code project by David Cournapeau, scikit-learn's first public release occurred on February 1, 2010, led by developers including Fabian Pedregosa, Gal Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, and Vincent Michel from the French National Institute for Research in Digital Science and Technology (INRIA). Since then, it has evolved into a community-driven project with contributions from a global team of over 50 core developers and thousands of participants through regular coding sprints, funded in part by organizations such as NVIDIA and Microsoft. The library is distributed under the permissive 3-Clause BSD license, allowing broad commercial and academic use while requiring preservation of copyright notices. As of December 2025, the stable version is 1.8.0, with ongoing development toward version 1.9, reflecting its commitment to regular three-month release cycles and compatibility with Python 3.10 and later.
Scikit-learn's modular design enables seamless integration with other Python ecosystems, such as pandas for data manipulation and matplotlib or seaborn for visualization, facilitating end-to-end machine learning workflows from data preparation to model deployment. Key strengths include its focus on medium-scale problems, robust cross-validation tools for model evaluation, and utilities for handling imbalanced datasets and feature engineering, which have made it one of the most popular machine learning libraries worldwide, with millions of downloads and citations in thousands of research papers.

Introduction

Overview

Scikit-learn is a free, open-source machine learning library for the Python programming language (BSD license) that implements a variety of classical algorithms for predictive data analysis and data mining. It is built on top of the NumPy, SciPy, and matplotlib libraries, enabling efficient numerical and scientific computing while providing tools for visualization. Designed primarily for predictive modeling, scikit-learn supports core machine learning tasks such as classification, regression, clustering, dimensionality reduction, model selection, and preprocessing, all accessible through a consistent and intuitive API. This makes it suitable for both educational and practical applications in data science.
The library's primary goals emphasize simplicity, efficiency, and modularity, allowing users to construct sophisticated models using a consistent and intuitive API with minimal code. This approach facilitates rapid prototyping and experimentation, while its modular structure promotes reusability across different projects. Scikit-learn excels in handling classical machine learning workflows, from data preprocessing to model evaluation and deployment, without the overhead of deep learning frameworks.
As of March 2026, the current stable version is 1.8.0, released on December 10, 2025, with active development underway toward version 1.9. Within the Python ecosystem, scikit-learn serves as a foundational tool for building machine learning pipelines, bridging exploratory data analysis with production-ready systems and integrating seamlessly with libraries like pandas and Jupyter.
Scikit-learn enjoys widespread adoption in the data science community, evidenced by over 58,000 GitHub stars and its inclusion among the top machine learning tools in recent lists. Its accessibility has made it a staple for practitioners and researchers tackling real-world problems in fields ranging from finance to healthcare.

Design Philosophy

Scikit-learn's design philosophy centers on providing a consistent and intuitive interface for machine learning tasks, encapsulated in the core methods of estimators: fit for training on data, predict for generating outputs from new inputs, and transform for modifying data representations. This uniform API applies across all modules, enabling users to interchange algorithms seamlessly without altering workflow structures, which promotes predictability and reduces the learning curve for diverse applications from classification to dimensionality reduction. The philosophy draws from experiences in developing scalable machine learning software, prioritizing simplicity in method signatures to handle both basic and composite objects uniformly.
A key emphasis lies in readability and minimal dependencies to ensure broad accessibility for beginners and experts alike. By leveraging Python's expressiveness alongside NumPy and SciPy for numerical operations, scikit-learn maintains clean, vectorized code that avoids unnecessary complexity, while optional dependencies like Matplotlib support visualization without mandating them for core functionality. This approach fosters an environment where users can prototype models rapidly, with the library's implementation in Cython for performance-critical parts ensuring efficiency without sacrificing Pythonic readability.
The modular design further embodies this philosophy by allowing pipeline construction through composable components, such as Pipeline and FeatureUnion, which chain preprocessing, estimation, and prediction steps without requiring advanced programming expertise. Users can build end-to-end workflows declaratively, integrating transformers and estimators to handle data flows intuitively.
Commitment to reproducibility underpins the library's reliability, achieved through utilities like the random_state parameter, which seeds random number generators to yield consistent results across runs, and built-in cross-validation tools that systematically partition data for robust model evaluation. These features mitigate variability in stochastic algorithms, supporting scientific rigor in experimentation.
Over time, scikit-learn's philosophy has evolved from facilitating quick research prototypingvia its extensible, duck-typed APIto enabling production deployment, exemplified by integration with Joblib for parallelism through the n_jobs parameter, which distributes computations across cores for scalable processing of large datasets. This progression maintains the library's foundational simplicity while accommodating real-world demands for efficiency and deployment.

Strengths and limitations

Strengths

Scikit-learn is widely recognized for its ease of use, characterized by a fast learning curve and a highly consistent interface across its estimators and tools. This design allows users to switch between different algorithms with minimal code changes, making the library accessible to beginners while remaining powerful for experienced practitioners.
The library offers an extensive collection of well-implemented classical machine learning algorithms, delivering high performance through optimized numerical computations built on NumPy and SciPy. Its comprehensive documentation, including detailed user guides, API references, and numerous examples, combined with a large and active community, provides excellent support for users at all levels.
Scikit-learn integrates seamlessly with the broader Python ecosystem, working effectively with tools such as pandas for data manipulation and Jupyter for interactive development. Licensed under the permissive BSD license, it is fully open-source, free to use, and commercially viable, broadening its applicability in both academic research and industry settings.

Limitations

Scikit-learn is primarily focused on traditional machine learning techniques and does not provide native support for deep learning methods such as neural networks. For tasks requiring deep learning architectures, users should consider specialized frameworks like PyTorch or TensorFlow.
The library is not designed for processing massive distributed datasets. For large-scale distributed computing, alternatives such as Dask-ML or Apache Spark's MLlib are more appropriate.
While scikit-learn includes many established algorithms, some advanced or state-of-the-art methods developed after its core design may require integration with external libraries or custom implementations.

History

Origins and Early Development

Scikit-learn originated in 2007 as a Google Summer of Code project led by David Cournapeau, aimed at extending the SciPy library with machine learning tools to support the burgeoning field of data analysis in Python. This initiative addressed the need for accessible statistical and ML capabilities within the scientific Python ecosystem, where researchers increasingly required efficient tools beyond basic numerical computing. Cournapeau's work laid the groundwork by prototyping algorithms that could leverage SciPy's infrastructure, marking the project's humble beginnings as part of the broader "scikits" effort to modularize extensions for SciPy, along with contributions from Matthieu Brucher as part of his thesis.
By 2010, the project gained momentum under the leadership of Fabian Pedregosa, Gal Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, and Bertrand Thirion, primarily affiliated with Inria (the National Institute for Research in Digital Science and Technology). These contributors formalized scikit-learn as a dedicated machine learning package, releasing its first public version on February 1, 2010, which introduced a unified Python interface for various algorithms. The motivation stemmed from the rapid growth in data science applications across domains like biology, physics, and web technologies, where a consistent, user-friendly API was essential to enable non-experts to apply state-of-the-art methods without delving into low-level implementations. This version 0.8 emphasized simplicity and interoperability, building directly on NumPy for array handling and SciPy for optimized computations in linear algebra and sparse data structures.
Early development faced challenges in harmonizing diverse existing libraries, such as wrapping the C++-based LIBSVM for support vector machines while minimizing overheadachieving about 40% less binding latency compared to prior interfaces. Integration with NumPy and SciPy required careful design to ensure seamless data flow, as Python's array operations sometimes limited efficiency in iterative algorithms like k-means clustering. The first stable release, version 0.9, arrived in September 2011, incorporating new modules for manifold learning and probabilistic models like the Dirichlet Process, solidifying scikit-learn's role as a robust toolkit. Through these efforts, the project evolved from a summer coding experiment into a foundational resource, fostering community contributions while maintaining high standards for documentation and test coverage exceeding 80%.

Major Releases and Evolution

Scikit-learn's development from 2015 onward has been marked by a series of major releases that introduced key algorithmic advancements, improved usability, and enhanced compatibility with modern Python ecosystems, reflecting the library's maturation into a robust tool for machine learning practitioners. Version 0.18, released in September 2016, represented a significant step forward with the introduction of multilayer perceptron (MLP) classifiers and regressors for basic neural network support, alongside major enhancements to model selection through the new sklearn.model_selection module, which replaced older cross-validation and grid search utilities for more consistent and flexible hyperparameter tuning. These changes improved ensemble method handling, such as better sample weighting in tree-based estimators, laying groundwork for scalable predictive modeling.
Subsequent releases built on this foundation, with version 0.20 in September 2018 enhancing preprocessing capabilities, including native support for missing values in scalers and the ColumnTransformer for applying different transformations to subsets of features, streamlining workflows for heterogeneous datasets. Version 0.21 in May 2019 introduced histogram-based gradient boosting classifiers and regressors (HistGradientBoostingClassifier and HistGradientBoostingRegressor), which offered faster training on large datasets by binning features into histograms, outperforming traditional gradient boosting for numerical data with over 10,000 samples. By 2021, version 0.24 further refined preprocessing with improved error handling in check_array for sparse DataFrames and fixes to ColumnTransformer feature naming, alongside new hyperparameter tuning classes like HalvingGridSearchCV for more efficient searches on large parameter spaces.
The milestone version 1.0, released in September 2021, emphasized long-term stability by enforcing keyword-only arguments in public methods (per SLEP009), reducing API breakage risks and signaling production readiness after years of consistent development. It introduced features like spline transformers for non-linear feature engineering and broader support for feature names in estimators, including integration with pandas outputs, while deprecating outdated datasets like load_boston. In 2023, version 1.3 advanced data handling with check_array now natively supporting pandas DataFrames containing extension arrays and numeric object columns, enabling seamless use of pandas for input validation without conversion overhead. This release also added metadata routing for advanced estimator customization and a skip_parameter_validation option to boost performance in trusted environments.
Version 1.5, released in May 2024, focused on scalability improvements, particularly in principal component analysis (PCA), where a new "covariance_eigh" solver provided up to 10x faster computation and reduced memory usage for datasets with many more samples than features, including sparse inputs. These optimizations extended to QuantileTransformer for denser array subsampling, making dimensionality reduction viable for larger-scale applications. The 1.7 series, culminating in version 1.7.2 on September 9, 2025, prioritized reliability with bug fixes such as resolving convergence issues in logistic regression under multi-class settings and validating transformer outputs in FeatureUnion, while adding support for Python 3.13 and experimental free-threaded CPython builds for better concurrency.
Over this period, scikit-learn evolved toward greater production readiness by incorporating interpretability tools like partial dependence plots (introduced in version 0.21) for visualizing feature impacts and calibration methods via CalibratedClassifierCV to align predicted probabilities with true outcomes, essential for deployment in risk-sensitive domains. Community feedback, primarily through GitHub issues and pull requests, drove iterative improvements, including deprecations in version 1.2 such as warnings for outdated calibration parameter passing, ensuring backward compatibility while pruning legacy elements. For deeper learning integrations, community wrappers like skorch enable scikit-learn-style APIs with PyTorch models, and similar extensions bridge to TensorFlow, allowing hybrid workflows without abandoning the library's estimator paradigm. Each release's changelog underscores these impacts, with version 1.7 highlighting array API compliance for future-proofing against evolving NumPy standards.

Technical Implementation

Core Architecture

Scikit-learn's core architecture is built around an object-oriented design that emphasizes a uniform interface for machine learning workflows, enabling seamless integration of diverse components. At its foundation lies the estimator paradigm, which standardizes the behavior of all machine learning objectsreferred to as estimatorsthrough a consistent API. This paradigm ensures that estimators, whether for fitting models, transforming data, or predicting outcomes, adhere to predictable methods like fit, predict, and transform, facilitating modularity and interoperability across the library.
Central to this paradigm are base classes such as BaseEstimator and TransformerMixin. The BaseEstimator class provides essential functionality for parameter management, including get_params and set_params methods, which allow estimators to be inspected and configured dynamicallycrucial for tools like grid search and pipelines. By inheriting from BaseEstimator, custom or built-in estimators gain compatibility with scikit-learn's meta-estimators, ensuring they can be nested or optimized without breaking the API. Complementing this, TransformerMixin adds the fit_transform method to transformer classes, optimizing the common pattern of fitting and transforming data in a single call, as seen in preprocessors like StandardScaler. Together, these classes enforce a uniform API where all estimators implement fit(X, y=None) as the primary training method, with optional extensions for prediction (predict) or transformation (transform), promoting code reusability and reducing errors in complex workflows.
Composition is a key architectural feature, achieved through utilities like Pipeline and ColumnTransformer. This enables chaining of multiple stepssuch as preprocessors, feature selectors, and modelsinto a single, cohesive estimator, preventing data leakage by ensuring transformations are applied consistently during training and prediction. For instance, a Pipeline object takes a sequence of named steps, executing them sequentially: all but the final step must be transformers, while the last can be any estimator, exposing its methods (e.g., predict) to the overall pipeline. The ColumnTransformer extends this by applying different transformations to subsets of features, supporting heterogeneous data types like dense arrays, sparse matrices, and DataFrames, thus streamlining preprocessing in real-world applications. This modular composition not only simplifies workflows but also allows joint optimization of hyperparameters across steps via tools like GridSearchCV.
Parallelization is integrated natively via the joblib library, providing efficient multi-core support without requiring users to manage threads or processes manually. Estimators expose an n_jobs parameter to control parallelism, spawning workers for computationally intensive operations such as cross-validation folds in cross_val_score or hyperparameter tuning in GridSearchCV. Joblib's backend (defaulting to loky for process-based parallelism) handles memory sharing through memory-mapped arrays for large datasets, mitigating overhead and enabling scalable performance on multi-core systems. This architecture avoids oversubscription by coordinating with lower-level threading in dependencies like NumPy, ensuring robust resource management across the library.
Error handling and input validation are enforced through utility functions in the sklearn.utils.validation module, promoting consistency and robustness in estimators. Functions like check_array validate and coerce input data to the expected formatensuring 2D arrays with finite values, supporting sparse matrices, and enforcing minimum dimensionsraising informative errors for inconsistencies such as non-numeric data or mismatched shapes. Similarly, check_X_y extends this to supervised learning inputs, verifying that feature matrix X and target y align in length and type, while validate_data (introduced in version 1.6) integrates validation directly into the estimator's fit method, automatically setting attributes like n_features_in_. These check_* functions are invoked within estimator implementations to catch issues early, maintaining the integrity of the uniform API and preventing downstream failures in pipelines or parallel operations.
Extension mechanisms allow for customization and third-party integrations by leveraging inheritance and standardized tags. Developers create custom estimators by subclassing BaseEstimator (and relevant mixins like ClassifierMixin), implementing required methods while using check_estimator to verify compliance with scikit-learn conventions, including input validation and API consistency. Estimator tags, defined via the __sklearn_tags__ attribute since version 1.6, declare capabilities such as support for partial fitting or sparse inputs, enabling meta-estimators to route data appropriately. For third-party extensions, the library's public API supports compatible estimators from packages like Intel's oneAPI Data Analytics Library (oneDAL), which accelerate algorithms while preserving the core interface, as well as integrations through compatible serialization formats like ONNX for model export. This design fosters an ecosystem where extensions enhance scikit-learn without altering its foundational architecture.

Dependencies and Performance

Scikit-learn depends on NumPy for efficient array handling and linear algebra operations, SciPy for scientific algorithms and sparse data structures, joblib for parallel processing in estimators, and threadpoolctl for controlling thread usage in underlying BLAS libraries like OpenBLAS or MKL to prevent oversubscription and optimize linear algebra performance. These dependencies ensure robust numerical computations and scalability across various hardware configurations.
Optional dependencies enhance specific functionalities, such as matplotlib for plotting results and visualizations in examples and benchmarks.
Performance optimizations in scikit-learn include the use of Cython to compile speed-critical components, such as nearest neighbors search in the KNeighborsClassifier, into optimized C code for faster execution compared to pure Python. Additionally, integration with SciPy's sparse matrix formats, including CSR and CSC representations, supports efficient handling of high-dimensional sparse datacommon in text processingby storing only non-zero elements, which can reduce memory footprint and computation time for predictions on datasets with over 90% sparsity.
Scalability features enable processing datasets larger than available memory through out-of-core learning via partial_fit methods in estimators like SGDClassifier, allowing incremental training on data streams without loading everything into RAM, as demonstrated in text classification pipelines where feature extraction dominates runtime. For distributed environments, scikit-learn integrates with Dask through joblib's backend, enabling parallel execution across clusters for tasks like hyperparameter tuning with RandomizedSearchCV, scaling CPU-bound workloads while maintaining the familiar API.
As of version 1.7.2, released in September 2025, scikit-learn requires Python 3.10 or newer, with support up to Python 3.14; earlier versions like 1.3 supported Python 3.8, but this was dropped starting with 1.4 to align with evolving ecosystem standards and security updates.
Benchmarking shows that the n_jobs parameter, which leverages joblib for multi-core parallelism, can reduce training times in cross-validation or grid search by a factor close to the number of CPU cores availablefor instance, on a multi-core machine, fitting a RandomForestClassifier with n_jobs=-1 utilizes all cores to parallelize tree construction, yielding near-linear speedups for independent subtasks. Bulk predictions further benefit, achieving 1-2 orders of magnitude faster latency than sequential calls.

Core Features

Supervised Learning

Scikit-learn provides a comprehensive suite of algorithms for supervised learning, encompassing both classification and regression tasks. These methods enable predictive modeling from labeled data, where the goal is to learn a mapping from input features to output labels or continuous values. The library implements efficient, scalable estimators that integrate seamlessly with its preprocessing pipeline, allowing users to apply techniques like feature scaling prior to model fitting.

Classification Algorithms

Logistic Regression in scikit-learn models the probability of a binary or multiclass outcome using the logistic function, where the probability $ p $ is given by $ p = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(-z)} $ and $ z = \mathbf{w} \cdot \mathbf{x} + b $, with $ \mathbf{w} $ as the weight vector and $ b $ as the bias term. It supports regularization through L1 (Lasso) and L2 (Ridge) penalties, controlled by the penalty parameter and the inverse regularization strength C, which helps prevent overfitting in high-dimensional settings.
Support Vector Machines (SVMs), implemented via classes like SVC and LinearSVC, construct hyperplanes to separate classes with maximum margin, employing kernel tricks such as the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel defined as $ k(\mathbf{x}_i, \mathbf{x}_j) = \exp(-\gamma |\mathbf{x}_i - \mathbf{x}_j|^2) $ to handle nonlinear data. The C parameter balances margin maximization against classification errors, while gamma tunes the kernel's curvature for RBF. These classifiers support both dense and sparse inputs and scale to multiclass problems using one-versus-one or one-versus-rest strategies.
Decision Trees, via DecisionTreeClassifier, build hierarchical structures based on feature splits that minimize impurity measures such as Gini index or entropy (information gain). For classification, Gini criterion computes node impurity as $ \sum_{k=1}^K p_k (1 - p_k) $, where $ p_k $ is the proportion of class $ k $ in the node, promoting splits that create purer child nodes. Random Forests extend this by ensemble averaging multiple decision trees trained on bootstrapped subsets and random feature selections, reducing variance and improving generalization; the n_estimators parameter controls tree count, and max_features limits split candidates to "sqrt" for classification by default.
Gradient Boosting, particularly through HistGradientBoostingClassifier, sequentially fits decision trees to residuals of previous models, optimizing arbitrary differentiable loss functions like log-loss for classification. It uses histogram binning (default 255 bins per feature) for faster training on large datasets, natively handling missing values and supporting early stopping after max_iter iterations. This implementation draws from gradient-boosted decision trees, offering performance comparable to specialized libraries while integrating with scikit-learn's ecosystem.

Regression Algorithms

Linear Regression, implemented as LinearRegression, fits a linear model by minimizing the ordinary least squares objective $ \min_{\mathbf{w}} |\mathbf{y} - X\mathbf{w}|^2 $, yielding coefficients interpretable as feature impacts. It assumes linearity and handles multicollinearity but can overfit without regularization.
Ridge Regression addresses overfitting via L2 regularization, minimizing $ |\mathbf{y} - X\mathbf{w}|^2 + \alpha |\mathbf{w}|^2 $, where alpha shrinks coefficients toward zero without sparsity. It performs well with correlated features and supports solvers like 'cholesky' for exact solutions. Lasso Regression, conversely, uses L1 regularization $ |\mathbf{y} - X\mathbf{w}|^2 + \alpha |\mathbf{w}|_1 $, inducing sparsity for automatic feature selection by setting some coefficients to exactly zero. The alpha hyperparameter in both controls the regularization strength.
Support Vector Regression (SVR) estimates continuous values within an epsilon-insensitive tube, using kernels like RBF for nonlinearity; the epsilon parameter defines the margin of tolerance, and C penalizes deviations beyond it. Random Forest Regressor aggregates tree predictions via averaging, employing MSE as the default split criterion to minimize variance, with parameters like n_estimators and max_features="auto" for tuning.

Evaluation Metrics

For classification, scikit-learn offers metrics such as accuracy, which measures the proportion of correct predictions; precision, the ratio of true positives to predicted positives; recall, the ratio of true positives to actual positives; and F1-score, their harmonic mean, particularly useful for imbalanced datasets. These are computed via functions like accuracy_score, precision_score, recall_score, and f1_score in the sklearn.metrics module.
In regression tasks, Mean Squared Error (MSE) quantifies average squared residuals; Mean Absolute Error (MAE) uses absolute differences for robustness to outliers; and R score indicates the proportion of variance explained, ranging from negative infinity to 1. Functions like mean_squared_error, mean_absolute_error, and r2_score facilitate these evaluations, often used in cross-validation to assess generalization.

Hyperparameter Tuning

Scikit-learn's GridSearchCV performs exhaustive grid search over specified hyperparameter values, using cross-validation to select the best combination for supervised estimators, as in tuning C and gamma for SVMs. It integrates with any scorer, such as 'accuracy' for classification, and outputs the optimal model via best_estimator_. RandomizedSearchCV samples randomly from parameter distributions (e.g., via SciPy), allowing efficient exploration for large spaces with n_iter trials, ideal for models like Random Forests where n_estimators and max_depth vary. Both tools support parallel execution and are essential for optimizing supervised models without manual trial-and-error.

Unsupervised Learning and Preprocessing

Scikit-learn provides a suite of tools for unsupervised learning, which focuses on discovering inherent structures in data without labeled targets, and preprocessing, which prepares raw data for effective modeling by handling transformations, scaling, and missing values. These modules enable tasks such as identifying clusters, reducing dimensionality for visualization or efficiency, detecting anomalies, and standardizing features to meet algorithmic assumptions. The library's implementations are optimized for integration within machine learning pipelines, emphasizing scalability and consistency with NumPy and SciPy arrays.
Clustering algorithms in scikit-learn partition data into groups based on similarity, with key implementations including K-Means, Hierarchical Clustering, and DBSCAN. K-Means assigns samples to a predefined number of clusters by iteratively updating centroids to minimize the within-cluster sum of squared distances, formulated as minimizing k=1KiCkxik2\sum_{k=1}^{K} \sum_{i \in C_k} \|x_i - \mu_k\|^2k=1KiCkxik2, where CkC_kCk is the set of points in cluster kkk and k\mu_kk is its centroid. To select the optimal number of clusters kkk, the elbow method evaluates inertia (sum of squared distances to centroids) across varying kkk values, identifying the "elbow" point where improvements diminish. Hierarchical Clustering builds a dendrogram by successively merging or splitting clusters using linkage criteria such as Ward's method, which minimizes intra-cluster variance; complete linkage, which uses maximum inter-point distances; average linkage, based on mean distances; or single linkage, using minimum distances. DBSCAN excels at discovering clusters of arbitrary shape by designating core points with at least min_samples neighbors within distance eps, then expanding clusters from these points while labeling sparse regions as noise.
Dimensionality reduction techniques in scikit-learn compress high-dimensional data while preserving structure, aiding visualization and computational efficiency. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) achieves this by performing eigenvalue decomposition on the covariance matrix =1nXTX\Sigma = \frac{1}{n} X^T X=n1XTX, selecting eigenvectors corresponding to the largest eigenvalues to maximize projected variance. This linear method centers the data and optionally whitens components to unit variance, with variants like IncrementalPCA supporting large datasets via online updates. For non-linear visualization, t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) preserves local neighborhoods by minimizing divergences between high- and low-dimensional similarities, though it is computationally intensive and suited for 2D/3D projections.
Preprocessing utilities standardize and transform features to ensure compatibility with downstream algorithms, addressing issues like scale disparities and categorical data. StandardScaler performs z-score normalization by subtracting the mean \mu and dividing by the standard deviation \sigma, yielding Xscaled=XX_{\text{scaled}} = \frac{X - \mu}{\sigma}Xscaled=X, which centers data at zero mean and unit variance to benefit distance-based methods. OneHotEncoder converts categorical variables into binary vectors, creating one column per category (with options to drop one for sparsity reduction) while handling unknown categories via strategies like infrequent replacement. SimpleImputer (formerly Imputer) fills missing values using strategies such as mean, median, or constant substitution, enabling robust handling of incomplete datasets. PolynomialFeatures expands features by generating all polynomial combinations up to a specified degree (e.g., degree=2 includes squares and interactions like x1x2x_1 x_2x1x2), introducing non-linearity without altering the original data.
Anomaly detection identifies outliers as deviations from normal patterns, with scikit-learn supporting Isolation Forest and One-Class SVM for unsupervised scenarios. Isolation Forest isolates anomalies via an ensemble of isolation trees, where each tree randomly partitions data; anomalies require fewer splits (shorter path lengths) due to their sparsity, with the anomaly score derived from average path length across trees. Key parameters include n_estimators for tree count and contamination estimating outlier proportion. One-Class SVM fits a boundary around normal data in a kernel-induced space (default RBF), classifying points outside this hypersphere as anomalies, controlled by nu which bounds the outlier fraction.

Usage and Examples

Installation and Basic Workflow

Scikit-learn can be installed on systems running Python 3.10 or later, with the recommended method being the use of pip, which automatically handles core dependencies such as NumPy (version 1.22.0 or later), SciPy (1.8.0 or later), joblib (1.2.0 or later), and threadpoolctl (3.1.0 or later). To install via pip, users first create a virtual environment using python -m venv sklearn-env, activate it (e.g., source sklearn-env/bin/activate on Linux/macOS or sklearn-env\Scripts\activate on Windows), and then run pip install -U scikit-learn. Alternatively, for managing environments and dependencies more robustly, especially in scientific computing workflows, installation via conda is supported by creating an environment with conda create -n sklearn-env -c conda-forge scikit-learn and activating it using conda activate sklearn-env. Verification of the installation involves checking the package details with python -m pip show scikit-learn or conda list scikit-learn, followed by importing the library in Python via import sklearn and displaying versions with sklearn.show_versions().
The basic workflow in scikit-learn follows a standardized end-to-end process for machine learning tasks, beginning with data loading, which integrates seamlessly with libraries like pandas for handling tabular data in DataFrame format. Next, the dataset is split into training and testing subsets using the train_test_split function from sklearn.model_selection, which randomly partitions features (X) and targets (y) while supporting stratification to maintain class distributions. Model training occurs by calling the .fit() method on an estimator instance with the training data, such as fitting a classifier or regressor to learn patterns from the features and labels. Predictions are then generated on unseen data using the .predict() method, which applies the learned model to new inputs. Finally, model performance is evaluated through the .score() method, which computes metrics like accuracy for classification or R for regression directly on the test set.
For more robust assessment beyond a single train-test split, scikit-learn provides cross-validation utilities such as KFold for general partitioning into k folds and StratifiedKFold for classification tasks to ensure balanced class representation across folds, typically integrated with cross_validate to compute scores like mean accuracy over multiple iterations. To streamline workflows and prevent data leakagewhere information from the test set influences trainingusers construct pipelines using make_pipeline from sklearn.pipeline, which chains preprocessing steps (e.g., scaling) with estimators in a single object that applies transformations consistently during fitting and prediction.
Best practices in scikit-learn emphasize reproducibility by setting the random_state parameter to a fixed integer (e.g., 0) in functions like train_test_split and random forest estimators, ensuring consistent results across runs given the same data. For datasets with imbalanced classes, the class_weight parameter in classifiers (e.g., 'balanced') automatically adjusts weights inversely proportional to class frequencies, mitigating bias toward majority classes during training.

Practical Code Examples

Scikit-learn provides a rich set of tools for implementing machine learning workflows through practical, executable code. The following examples illustrate key usage patterns, drawing from the library's built-in datasets and estimators. These snippets are self-contained and can be run in a Python environment with scikit-learn installed, assuming necessary dependencies like NumPy, Matplotlib, and SciPy are available.

Example 1: Iris Classification with LogisticRegression

The Iris dataset, a multiclass classification benchmark consisting of 150 samples across three species with four features (sepal length, sepal width, petal length, and petal width), serves as an ideal starting point for demonstrating supervised learning. To classify the species using logistic regression, first load the dataset, split it into training and testing sets, fit the model, generate predictions, and evaluate performance with a confusion matrix visualization.
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix, ConfusionMatrixDisplay

# Load the Iris dataset
iris = load_iris()
X, y = iris.data, iris.target

# Split the data into training and testing sets
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.3, random_state=42)

# Fit the (/page/Logistic_regression) model
model = LogisticRegression(max_iter=200)
model.fit(X_train, y_train)

# Make predictions on the test set
y_pred = model.predict(X_test)

# Compute and visualize the confusion matrix
cm = confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
disp = ConfusionMatrixDisplay(confusion_matrix=cm, display_labels=iris.target_names)
disp.plot(cmap=plt.cm.Blues)
plt.title('Confusion Matrix for Iris Classification')
plt.show()
This code achieves near-perfect accuracy on the test set, with the confusion matrix highlighting any misclassifications, such as occasional confusion between versicolor and virginica due to overlapping features.

Example 2: California Housing Regression with RandomForestRegressor

For regression tasks, the California housing dataset offers 20,640 samples of median house values in California districts, with eight numerical features like median income and house age. This example replaces the deprecated Boston dataset but follows a similar workflow: load the data, apply feature scaling, perform cross-validation to assess model performance, fit a random forest regressor, and plot feature importances to identify influential predictors. Random forests ensemble multiple decision trees for robust predictions, reducing overfitting through averaging.
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import (/page/NumPy) as np
from sklearn.datasets import fetch_california_housing
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestRegressor
from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from sklearn.pipeline import make_pipeline

# Load the California housing dataset
housing = fetch_california_housing()
X, y = housing.data, housing.target

# Create a pipeline with scaling and the regressor
(/page/Pipeline) = make_pipeline(StandardScaler(), RandomForestRegressor(n_estimators=100, random_state=42))

# Perform cross-validation to score the model
scores = cross_val_score((/page/Pipeline), (/page/X&Y), cv=5, scoring='neg_mean_squared_error')
print(f"Mean MSE: {-scores.mean():.4f} (+/- {scores.std() * 2:.4f})")

# Fit the pipeline on the full data for feature importances
(/page/Pipeline).fit((/page/X&Y))
feature_importances = (/page/Pipeline).named_steps.feature_importances_

# Plot feature importances
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
indices = np.argsort(feature_importances)
plt.bar(range((/page/X&Y).shape), feature_importances)
plt.xticks(range((/page/X&Y).shape), housing.feature_names, (/page/Rotation)=45)
(/page/Title)('Feature Importances in California Housing Regression')
(/page/Title)()
(/page/Title)()
Cross-validation yields a mean squared error around 0.35, indicating good predictive power, with median income emerging as the most important feature.

Example 3: Digit Clustering with KMeans on MNIST Subset

Unsupervised clustering on the digits dataset (a subset of MNIST with 1,797 grayscale images of handwritten digits 0-9, each 8x8 pixels or 64 features) demonstrates KMeans for grouping similar samples. To determine the optimal number of clusters (k=10 for digits), compute an elbow plot of inertia (within-cluster sum of squares) across k values, then fit the model and evaluate using the silhouette score, which measures cluster cohesion and separation (range: -1 to 1, higher is better).
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import (/page/NumPy) as np
from sklearn.datasets import load_digits
from sklearn.cluster import (/page/cluster)
from sklearn.metrics import silhouette_score
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA

# Load the digits dataset
digits = load_digits()
X = digits.data

# Elbow method to find optimal k
inertias = 
sil_scores = 
K = range(2, 20)
for k in K:
 kmeans = (/page/cluster)(n_clusters=k, random_state=42, n_init=10)
 kmeans.fit(X)
 inertias.append(kmeans.(/page/Inertia)_)
 sil_scores.append(silhouette_score(X, kmeans.labels_))

# Plot elbow curve
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 5))
plt.subplot(1, 2, 1)
plt.plot(K, inertias, 'bx-')
plt.xlabel('k')
plt.ylabel('Inertia')
plt.title('Elbow Method for Optimal k')

# Plot silhouette scores
plt.subplot(1, 2, 2)
plt.plot(K, sil_scores, 'bx-')
plt.xlabel('k')
plt.ylabel('Silhouette Score')
plt.title('Silhouette Scores for k')
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()

# Fit KMeans with k=10 and compute silhouette
kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=10, random_state=42, n_init=10)
kmeans.fit(X)
silhouette_avg = silhouette_score(X, kmeans.labels_)
print(f'Silhouette Score for k=10: {silhouette_avg:.4f}')
The elbow plot shows a bend around k=10, and the silhouette score peaks near 0.19, confirming reasonable clustering quality despite some digit ambiguities like 4 and 9. For visualization, reduce dimensions with PCA and plot clusters.

Integration Example: Pipeline with StandardScaler and SVM for Text Classification on 20 Newsgroups

The 20 Newsgroups dataset contains approximately 18,000 newsgroup posts across 20 topics, suitable for text classification. A pipeline integrates text vectorization (using TF-IDF for term frequency-inverse document frequency weighting), optional scaling for numerical stability, and a support vector machine (SVM via LinearSVC) to classify topics efficiently on sparse high-dimensional data. This automates preprocessing and fitting, ensuring consistency.
from sklearn.datasets import fetch_20newsgroups
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import TfidfVectorizer
from sklearn.svm import LinearSVC
from sklearn.pipeline import make_pipeline
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report

# Load a subset of the 20 Newsgroups dataset
categories = 
newsgroups_train = fetch_20newsgroups(subset='train', categories=categories, remove=('headers', 'footers', 'quotes'))
newsgroups_test = fetch_20newsgroups(subset='test', categories=categories, remove=('headers', 'footers', 'quotes'))
X_train, y_train = newsgroups_train.data, newsgroups_train.target
X_test, y_test = newsgroups_test.data, newsgroups_test.target

# Create pipeline: TF-IDF vectorizer (includes L2 normalization akin to scaling), followed by SVM (LinearSVC)
pipeline = make_pipeline(
 TfidfVectorizer(max_features=5000),
 LinearSVC(random_state=42)
)

# Fit and predict
pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)
y_pred = pipeline.predict(X_test)

# Evaluate
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, target_names=categories))
Note that for sparse TF-IDF features, StandardScaler is typically omitted as TF-IDF already normalizes; LinearSVC handles unscaled inputs well. This pipeline achieves around 90% accuracy on the subset, with precision and recall varying by category.

Error-Prone Pitfalls: Demonstrating Data Leakage in Code and Fixes

Data leakage occurs when information from the test set inadvertently influences training, leading to inflated performance estimates; a common instance is applying preprocessing like scaling to the entire dataset before splitting. This violates the principle that models should only use training data for transformations available at prediction time.
Consider a flawed approach on the Iris dataset:
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score

iris = load_iris()
X, y = iris.data, iris.target

# Pitfall: Scaling the entire dataset before splitting (leakage)
scaler = StandardScaler()
X_scaled = scaler.fit_transform(X) # Uses test data info in fit
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X_scaled, y, test_size=0.3, random_state=42)

model = LogisticRegression()
model.fit(X_train, y_train)
y_pred = model.predict(X_test)
print(f'Leaky accuracy: {accuracy_score(y_test, y_pred):.4f}') # Overly optimistic
This yields unrealistically high accuracy (e.g., 1.0000) because the scaler incorporates test set statistics.
The fix uses a pipeline to apply scaling only within cross-validation folds or on training data:
from sklearn.pipeline import make_pipeline

# Correct: Pipeline ensures scaling is fit only on train
(/page/Pipeline) = make_pipeline(StandardScaler(), LogisticRegression())
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.3, random_state=(/page/42))
pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)
y_pred = pipeline.predict(X_test)
print(f'Correct accuracy: {accuracy_score(y_test, y_pred):.4f}') # Realistic ~0.98
Pipelines prevent leakage by deferring transformations to the fitting step, ensuring test data remains unseen during preprocessing. Always validate splits and use tools like cross_val_score for robust evaluation.

Applications

Industry Sectors

Scikit-learn is widely used across diverse industry sectors for a variety of machine learning tasks, including classification (such as spam detection and image recognition), regression (such as predicting stock prices and drug responses), clustering (such as customer segmentation and grouping experiments), recommendation systems, fraud detection, and predictive analytics. Notable adopters include Spotify for music recommendations, Booking.com for hotel recommendations and fraud detection, and J.P. Morgan for classification and predictive analytics, among others.
Scikit-learn has found widespread adoption in the finance and insurance sectors for tasks such as fraud detection and risk assessment, leveraging its unsupervised learning algorithms like Isolation Forest to identify anomalous transactions in real-time. For instance, financial institutions utilize scikit-learn's ensemble methods to enhance fraud detection systems by isolating outliers in transaction data, achieving higher accuracy in flagging suspicious activities compared to traditional rule-based approaches. In insurance, the library supports predictive modeling for claims processing, where regression techniques such as Tweedie regression are applied to forecast claim amounts based on historical datasets, enabling insurers to streamline underwriting and reduce processing times. A notable example is Zopa, a UK-based lending platform, which employs scikit-learn for credit risk modeling and fraud detection, integrating classification algorithms to evaluate loan applications and mitigate financial risks. Similarly, J.P. Morgan utilizes scikit-learn as an indispensable part of its Python machine learning toolkit for classification, predictive analytics, and a wide range of other machine learning tasks across the bank.
In retail and e-commerce, scikit-learn facilitates customer segmentation and personalized recommendations through clustering and collaborative filtering techniques, helping businesses optimize inventory and boost sales. Retailers apply K-Means clustering from scikit-learn to group customers based on purchasing behavior and demographics, allowing for targeted marketing campaigns that improve customer retention. For product recommendations, platforms like Booking.com leverage scikit-learn for recommendation engines to suggest hotels and destinations based on user preferences, enhancing user experience and increasing conversion rates in competitive e-commerce environments.
The media and marketing industries utilize scikit-learn for content personalization and audience targeting, particularly through clustering for playlist curation. Spotify employs scikit-learn for music recommendations, analyzing user preferences to generate cohesive playlists that drive user engagement and content discovery.
Technology companies integrate scikit-learn into internal tools for A/B testing and feature engineering, supporting data-driven decision-making in product development. For example, firms use scikit-learn's cross-validation utilities to evaluate experiment outcomes in A/B tests, ensuring robust statistical analysis of user behavior metrics like engagement and retention. In areas like software optimization, the library aids feature selection and preprocessing, allowing teams to build scalable models for tasks such as anomaly detection in system logs.
In healthcare, scikit-learn contributes to pharmaceutical research by enabling regression models for drug response prediction, accelerating the identification of effective treatments. Researchers apply linear and ridge regression from scikit-learn to analyze genomic and chemical data, forecasting patient responses to drugs and prioritizing candidates for clinical trials based on predictive accuracy. This approach has been instrumental in precision medicine initiatives, where models trained on datasets like Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer help simulate therapeutic outcomes, reducing development timelines and costs.

Research and Academia

Scikit-learn plays a pivotal role in academic machine learning education, serving as a foundational tool in university curricula worldwide. For instance, at Stanford University, the Iris dataset bundled with scikit-learn is commonly featured in machine learning courses like CS229 to illustrate classification tasks, enabling students to implement supervised learning algorithms from scratch or using library functions. The library's intuitive API and built-in datasets facilitate hands-on learning of core concepts such as model fitting, evaluation, and hyperparameter tuning, making it ideal for introductory and advanced syllabi. Its integration into course projects allows students to experiment with real-world data without the overhead of low-level implementations.
In research, scikit-learn has been extensively cited, underscoring its impact on scientific publications. The seminal paper introducing the library, "Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python" by Pedregosa et al., has garnered over 88,000 citations as of 2025, reflecting its widespread adoption in peer-reviewed studies across disciplines. In neuroscience, researchers at Inria have leveraged scikit-learn for analyzing brain signals, particularly in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies. Techniques like dimensionality reduction via principal component analysis and support vector machines enable decoding of neural patterns and brain-behavior correlations, as demonstrated in applications for neuroimaging data processing.
Open research contributions further extend scikit-learn's utility in academia through community-driven extensions and tools for reproducible science. The scikit-learn-contrib GitHub organization hosts packages like scikit-learn-extra, which provide niche algorithms such as HDBSCAN clustering and label propagation that do not yet meet the core library's inclusion criteria but support specialized research needs. Additionally, scikit-learn's compatibility with Jupyter notebooks promotes reproducible workflows, allowing researchers to document experiments inline with code, visualizations, and results, as seen in numerous open-source neuroscience and data science repositories.
Educational resources bolster scikit-learn's academic footprint, with official tutorials and massive open online courses (MOOCs) emphasizing practical implementation. The Inria-developed scikit-learn MOOC, hosted on the FUN platform, offers free, self-paced modules covering predictive modeling, data preprocessing, and model evaluation through interactive notebooks and quizzes. Platforms like Coursera and edX feature specialized courses, such as "Introduction to Data Science and scikit-learn in Python," where learners apply the library in hands-on labs for tasks like regression and clustering. These resources democratize access to machine learning education, fostering skills in reproducible analysis.
Scikit-learn's influence extends to competitive academic settings, notably Kaggle competitions, where it serves as a standard for establishing baselines in over 80% of winning solutions analyzed from 2020 to 2025. Participants frequently use its preprocessing and ensemble methods to prototype models before integrating advanced techniques, highlighting its role in rapid experimentation and validation in data science research. This usage reinforces scikit-learn's status as a benchmark tool in empirical studies and student-led competitions.

Community and Recognition

Contributors and Governance

The scikit-learn project is sustained by a dedicated open-source community, with core contributors forming specialized teams that handle maintenance, documentation, communication, and contributor support. The active core contributors include approximately 19 maintainers such as Alexandre Gramfort, Andreas Mueller, and Jrmie du Boisberranger, alongside smaller teams for documentation (e.g., Arturo Amor, Lucy Liu), contributor experience (e.g., Virgil Chan, Juan Carlos Alfaro Jimnez), and communication (e.g., Lauren Burke-McCarthy, Franois Goupil). Emeritus contributors, including early leaders like Fabian Pedregosa and Mathieu Blondel, have transitioned to advisory roles after significant foundational work, while the broader community encompasses over 3,000 total contributors who have submitted code, documentation, or issue reports via GitHub as of November 2025.
Governance operates under a meritocratic, consensus-seeking framework that emphasizes community input while ensuring efficient decision-making. All core contributors possess equal voting rights, and proposals are discussed publicly through GitHub issues and pull requests, the project mailing list, or in-person/virtual sprints. For contentious or major changes, such as API modifications, a Scikit-Learn Enhancement Proposal (SLEP) is required, needing approval from at least two core contributors and no objections; unresolved matters escalate to the Technical Committee (TC) after one month, where a two-thirds majority vote among its memberscurrently including Thomas Fan, Alexandre Gramfort, and othersresolves the issue. This structure replaced earlier informal processes to better scale with community growth, as detailed in SLEP 020.
Contributions follow rigorous guidelines to uphold code quality and accessibility. Code must conform to PEP 8 standards, with inline comments for clarity and no alterations to unrelated files; new features require unit tests via pytest targeting at least 90% coverage, executable locally or in continuous integration. Documentation enhancements use Sphinx for docstrings, user guides, and examples, built and previewed during development. Pull requests are submitted via GitHub forks, labeled for ease (e.g., "good first issue" for newcomers), and merged only after review by two core contributors, promoting collaborative refinement.
Funding supports development through a mix of nonprofit grants and industry partnerships, enabling paid contributor time and infrastructure. As of 2025, key sources include NumFOCUS for fiscal sponsorship, the Inria Foundation Consortium (with members like Chanel and AXA), and corporate backers such as probabl.ai, NVIDIA, Microsoft, Quansight Labs, the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative, Wellcome Trust, and Tidelift. Historical funding from Google, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and universities like Columbia and Sydney has also been instrumental in early scaling. In-kind donations from Anaconda, CircleCI, GitHub, and Microsoft Azure further aid operations.
Diversity and inclusion are prioritized through targeted programs to broaden participation. The mentored internship initiative, formalized in SLEP 006, provides paid opportunities for underrepresented individuals to contribute under guidance from core developers, as exemplified by participant experiences shared in project updates. Annual coding sprints, numbering over 50 since 2010, incorporate onboarding sessions and mentorship to lower barriers for newcomers from varied backgrounds, fostering an equitable community environment, with ongoing support from initiatives like the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative and Wellcome Trust for equity in open source software.

Awards and Milestones

Scikit-learn has received several formal recognitions for its contributions to open-source machine learning software. In 2019, core developers Gal Varoquaux, Bertrand Thirion, Loc Estve, Olivier Grisel, and Alexandre Gramfort were awarded the Inria-French Academy of Sciences-Dassault Systmes Innovation Prize for their work on scikit-learn, highlighting its role in democratizing statistical learning and fostering collaboration between research and industry.
Key milestones underscore the project's growth and stability. The release of version 1.0 on September 24, 2021, marked a significant achievement, signifying a stable and mature API after years of development and community feedback. In 2012, scikit-learn was selected for the Google Summer of Code program, supporting three student projects that enhanced features like sparse linear models and dictionary learning. More recently, in August 2025, the project completed the GitHub Secure Open Source Training, adopting best practices for security in open-source development.
The library's impact extends to high-profile scientific work and broad adoption. Scikit-learn has been used in machine learning challenges analyzing Higgs boson data, such as the 2014 Higgs ML Challenge, where techniques aided particle classification. Surveys indicate strong usage among Python machine learning practitioners, with scikit-learn consistently ranking as the most popular framework; for instance, in the 2022 Kaggle State of Machine Learning and Data Science Survey, it was used by over 40% of respondents, far outpacing alternatives. This widespread adoption reflects its accessibility and reliability in both academia and industry.

References

scikit-learn: machine learning in Python scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python

About us

scikit-learn: machine learning in Python - GitHub

Release History scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

scikit-learn: machine learning in Python scikit-learn 1.7.2 ...

scikit-learn - PyPI

Version 1.8.dev0 - Scikit-learn

Installing scikit-learn

8 of the Most Popular Machine Learning Tools in 2025 - Atlantic.Net

Top 10 Machine Learning Frameworks in 2025 - GeeksforGeeks

 API design for machine learning software - arXiv

Glossary of Common Terms and API Elements - Scikit-learn

9.3. Parallelism, resource management, and configuration

https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html

Release history scikit-learn 0.19.2 documentation

Release history scikit-learn 0.18.2 documentation

A Beginner's Guide to Neural Networks with Python and SciKit Learn ...

Version 0.20 scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Version 0.24.2 - Scikit-learn

Scikit-Learn 0.24: Top 5 new features you need to know - Zindi

Version 1.0.2 - Scikit-learn

Release Highlights for scikit-learn 1.0

Version 1.3 scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Version 1.5 scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Version 1.7.1 - Scikit-learn

Releases scikit-learn/scikit-learn - GitHub

5.1. Partial Dependence and Individual Conditional Expectation plots

Version 1.2.2 - Scikit-learn

Developing scikit-learn estimators

BaseEstimator scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.base.TransformerMixin.html

7.1. Pipelines and composite estimators - Scikit-learn

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.pipeline.Pipeline.html

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.compose.ColumnTransformer.html

check_array

check_X_y scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

validate_data scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

check_estimator scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

9.2. Computational Performance scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/sparse.html

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/applications/plot_out_of_core_classification.html

Scikit-Learn & Joblib dask-ml 2025.1.1 documentation

1. Supervised learning scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

1.1. Linear Models scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

LogisticRegression scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

1.4. Support Vector Machines

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.SVC.html

1.10. Decision Trees scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier.html

1.11. Ensembles: Gradient boosting, random forests, bagging, voting ...

RandomForestClassifier scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

HistGradientBoostingClassifier scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1013203451

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LinearRegression.html

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.Ridge.html

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.Lasso.html

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.SVR.html

RandomForestRegressor scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

3.4. Metrics and scoring: quantifying the quality of predictions

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.accuracy_score.html

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.mean_squared_error.html

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.r2_score.html

3.2. Tuning the hyper-parameters of an estimator - Scikit-learn

GridSearchCV scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.RandomizedSearchCV.html

2.3. Clustering scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

2.5. Decomposing signals in components (matrix factorization problems)

7.3. Preprocessing data

2.7. Novelty and Outlier Detection

 k-means++: The Advantages of Careful Seeding - Stanford CS Theory

Isolation Forest | IEEE Conference Publication

 Support Vector Method for Novelty Detection

Getting Started scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

load_iris scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Confusion matrix

fetch_california_housing scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#k-means

A demo of K-Means clustering on the handwritten digits data

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#silhouette-coefficient

fetch_20newsgroups scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Classification of text documents using sparse features - Scikit-learn

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/common_pitfalls.html#data-leakage

IsolationForest scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Tweedie regression on insurance claims - Scikit-learn

What is scikit-learn? (Updated 2025) - igmGuru

KMeans scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

What Is Scikit-learn and How Is It Used in AI? - Dataquest

3.1. Cross-validation: evaluating estimator performance - Scikit-learn

Establishing predictive machine learning models for drug responses ...

Comparative analysis of regression algorithms for drug response ...

Machine Learning - Projects - CS229

Stanford CS229 Machine Learning Models - GitHub

(PDF) Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python - ResearchGate

Machine learning for neuroimaging with scikit-learn - PubMed - NIH

 Machine learning for NeuroImaging data analysis - Hal-Inria

scikit-learn-contrib - GitHub

Examples scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

Introduction Scikit-learn course - GitHub Pages

Kaggle Winning Solutions: AI Trends & Insights

Scikit-learn governance and decision-making

https://scikit-learn-enhancement-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/slep020/proposal.html

Contributing scikit-learn 1.7.2 documentation

scikit-learn , a success story for machine learning free software | Inria

3 Google summer of code for scikit-learn and more

scikit-learn Completes the GitHub Secure Open Source Training

 Higgs Boson Discovery with Boosted Trees

2022 Kaggle Machine Learning & Data Science Survey

scikit-learn 1.8.0 release notes
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion