Serial Peripheral Interface Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Serial Peripheral Interface
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is a synchronous serial communication protocol designed for full-duplex, high-speed data exchange between a master device and one or more slave peripherals over short distances, typically within a single printed circuit board. Developed by Motorola (now NXP Semiconductors) in the early 1980s, SPI has become a de facto standard widely adopted in embedded systems for interfacing microcontrollers with sensors, memory devices, displays, and other peripherals.
In SPI, communication operates in a master-slave architecture where the master device generates the serial clock signal (SCLK) to synchronize data transfer, enabling simultaneous bidirectional data flow without a formal protocol overhead. The interface uses four primary signals: SCLK for clocking, MOSI (Master Out Slave In) for data from master to slave, MISO (Master In Slave Out) for data from slave to master, and SS/CS (Slave Select/Chip Select) to designate the active slave among multiple devices. Data is transferred in frames of programmable length (commonly 8 or 16 bits), with the master controlling the clock polarity (CPOL) and phase (CPHA) to support four operational modes for compatibility with diverse devices.
SPI's simplicity, lack of addressing scheme (relying instead on dedicated select lines), and support for transfer rates up to tens of megahertz make it ideal for applications requiring low latency and high throughput, such as in automotive electronics, industrial controls, and consumer devices. Unlike protocols like IC, SPI does not require pull-up resistors or multi-master arbitration, reducing hardware complexity while enabling daisy-chaining of slaves in some configurations. Its open specification has led to widespread implementation across semiconductor vendors, ensuring interoperability without licensing fees.

Fundamentals

History and Origins

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) was developed by Motorola in the mid-1980s as a straightforward synchronous serial communication protocol intended for short-distance data exchange between integrated circuits on the same circuit board. This interface emerged to meet the growing demand for efficient, full-duplex serial links in early embedded systems, where simplicity and speed were prioritized over long-range capabilities. Unlike more complex protocols, SPI was engineered for minimal overhead, using a master-slave architecture to synchronize data transfer via a dedicated clock line.
A pivotal document in SPI's formalization was Motorola's Application Note AN991, originally published in 1987, which provided the first detailed description of the protocol. Titled "Using the Serial Peripheral Interface to Communicate Between Multiple Microcomputers," it outlined the original four-wire configuration: Serial Clock (SCK) for synchronization, Master Out Slave In (MOSI) for data from master to slave, Master In Slave Out (MISO) for data from slave to master, and Slave Select (SS) to designate active devices. The note demonstrated SPI's implementation in hardware on the MC68HC05C4 microcontroller and in software on the MC68705R3, highlighting its versatility for inter-microcomputer communication without requiring additional protocol layers.
SPI saw initial adoption within Motorola's product lineup, notably in the 68HC11 family of 8-bit microcontrollers introduced in 1984, where it served as a built-in peripheral for interfacing with sensors, memory, and other ICs. By the late 1980s, the protocol expanded to other vendors, fostering broader interoperability. Although never ratified as an official standard by bodies like IEEE or ISO, SPI evolved into a de facto industry norm by the 1990s, driven by its integration into countless embedded applications and the absence of licensing restrictions. By 1990, it had achieved widespread use in microcomputer-based systems for tasks requiring reliable, high-speed local data transfer.

Basic Principles

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is a synchronous serial communication protocol designed for short-distance data exchange between a microcontroller and peripheral devices, such as sensors or memory chips. It operates in full-duplex mode, enabling simultaneous transmission and reception of data over dedicated lines.
At its core, SPI employs four primary signal lines: the Serial Clock (SCK), which is generated by the master device to synchronize data transfer; Master Out Slave In (MOSI), for data output from the master to the slave; Master In Slave Out (MISO), for data input from the slave to the master; and Slave Select (SS) or Chip Select (CS), which activates a specific slave device. These lines facilitate a straightforward, hardware-based interface without requiring complex protocol overhead.
SPI follows a master-slave architecture, where a single master devicetypically a microcontrollercontrols the communication by providing the clock signal and initiating transfers, while one or more slave devices respond passively without generating their own clock. This setup ensures deterministic timing and simplifies implementation, as slaves only need to detect the clock and select signals to participate. The full-duplex nature allows the master and slave to exchange data bits concurrently during each clock cycle, doubling the effective throughput compared to half-duplex alternatives.
The protocol is optimized for short-distance connections, commonly spanning within a single printed circuit board (PCB) or up to approximately 10 meters with appropriate buffering to mitigate signal degradation. Unlike protocols with built-in addressing schemes, SPI lacks formal device addressing; instead, the master selects slaves individually using dedicated SS lines or through software-based decoding on a shared line, enabling point-to-point or multi-slave bus configurations.

Operation

Data Transmission Protocol

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) operates as a synchronous, full-duplex master-slave protocol for serial data exchange between integrated circuits, where the master device controls the timing and flow of communication using four primary signal lines: serial clock (SCK), master out slave in (MOSI), master in slave out (MISO), and slave select (SS). The master initiates each transaction by asserting the SS line low for the specific slave device, signaling the start of data transfer and enabling the slave to prepare for reception. This selection mechanism ensures that only the targeted slave responds, while others remain inactive.
Once initiated, the master generates the SCK signal to synchronize the bit stream, shifting data serially in frames that are typically 8 bits long, with transmission occurring most significant bit (MSB) first. On the MOSI line, the master outputs its data bits, which the slave samples on designated clock edges; concurrently, the slave outputs its response data on the MISO line, which the master samples on the same or corresponding edges, facilitating simultaneous bidirectional transfer. This full-duplex capability allows efficient data exchange without waiting for unidirectional cycles, though the exact sampling edges depend on the configured mode without altering the overall protocol flow.
In the idle state, the SS line remains high and the clock idles at the level defined by the clock polarity (CPOL), preventing any unintended data activity and maintaining a stable bus condition. A transaction concludes when the master deasserts the SS line high, which resets the slave's internal shift registers and counters, preparing it for the next selection. This deassertion marks the end of the frame and ensures proper synchronization for subsequent operations.
SPI lacks built-in error detection or correction mechanisms, such as cyclic redundancy checks (CRC) or hardware acknowledgments, making it a lightweight protocol that depends on overlying software layers for verifying data integrity and handling transmission errors. This design prioritizes speed and simplicity over robustness, suitable for short-distance, low-error environments like on-chip or board-level communications.

Clock Polarity and Phase

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) protocol incorporates two key configurable parameters for the serial clock (SCLK): clock polarity (CPOL) and clock phase (CPHA). These parameters define the clock's idle state and the timing of data sampling relative to clock edges, ensuring synchronization between the master and slave devices during transmission.
Clock polarity, denoted as CPOL, determines the default logic level of the SCLK line during the idle period, which occurs when the chip select (CS) signal is deasserted (high). A CPOL value of 0 configures the clock to idle low (logic 0), while CPOL = 1 sets it to idle high (logic 1). This polarity affects the initial state from which clock transitions occur when CS is asserted, influencing the overall waveform and compatibility with connected peripherals.
Clock phase, denoted as CPHA, specifies when data is captured (sampled) by the receiver relative to the clock edges. With CPHA = 0, data is sampled on the first clock edge after CS assertionthe leading edgewhile the transmitter shifts data on the opposite (trailing) edge. For CPHA = 1, sampling occurs on the second clock edgethe trailing edgewith shifting on the leading edge. This distinction separates the setup phase (where data is prepared) from the capture phase (where it is read), preventing timing conflicts in bidirectional communication.
The combination of CPOL and CPHA yields four distinct operating configurations, conventionally labeled as SPI modes 0 through 3, each producing unique clock waveforms that dictate data validity windows. In mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0), the clock idles low; data is sampled on the rising edge and shifted on the falling edge, resulting in a waveform where the first rising edge captures the initial bit after CS assertion. Mode 1 (CPOL=0, CPHA=1) also idles low but samples on the falling edge and shifts on the rising edge, with data setup occurring before the first falling edge. For mode 2 (CPOL=1, CPHA=0), the clock idles high; sampling happens on the falling edge (first transition from high), with shifting on the rising edge. Finally, mode 3 (CPOL=1, CPHA=1) idles high, sampling on the rising edge and shifting on the falling edge, where the first rising edge follows an initial high-to-low transition. These waveforms ensure data stability during transfers, with the master initiating pulses to align bits across MOSI and MISO lines.
To maintain reliable operation, data must adhere to minimum setup and hold times around the sampling edges, as specified in device datasheets. Setup time is the duration data must be stable before the sampling edge, typically around 10 ns, while hold time requires stability after the edge, often exceeding 15 ns in some implementations to account for propagation delays. Clock cycle times must accommodate these, for example, supporting frequencies up to 10 MHz with periods of at least 100 ns in certain peripherals. Mismatches in these timings can lead to bit errors, necessitating careful configuration.
Among the modes, mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0) serves as the most common default in many systems due to its alignment with natural clock behaviors in CMOS logic, promoting broad interoperability unless a peripheral datasheet specifies otherwise. Masters are often designed to support all four modes for flexibility, while slaves may be fixed to one or two.

Mode Numbers and Valid Sequences

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) defines four standard operating modes based on the combination of clock polarity (CPOL) and clock phase (CPHA) settings, which determine the clock's idle state and the timing of data sampling and shifting. These modes ensure compatibility between master and slave devices by standardizing how data is captured relative to clock edges.
In Mode 0, CPOL is 0 and CPHA is 0, resulting in a clock that idles low and samples data on the leading (rising) edge while shifting data on the trailing (falling) edge. Mode 1 sets CPOL to 0 and CPHA to 1, with the clock idling low but sampling data on the trailing (falling) edge and shifting on the leading (rising) edge. Mode 2 uses CPOL=1 and CPHA=0, where the clock idles high and samples data on the leading (falling) edge, shifting on the trailing (rising) edge. Finally, Mode 3 combines CPOL=1 and CPHA=1, with the clock idling high, sampling on the trailing (rising) edge, and shifting on the leading (falling) edge.
The following table summarizes the four SPI modes:
ModeCPOLCPHAIdle Clock LevelData Sample EdgeData Shift Edge
000LowRising (leading)Falling (trailing)
101LowFalling (trailing)Rising (leading)
210HighFalling (leading)Rising (trailing)
311HighRising (trailing)Falling (leading)

For reliable communication, the master and slave devices must operate in the same mode, as mismatches in CPOL or CPHA lead to incorrect data sampling and potential corruption. All pairings where the master and slave modes differ are incompatible, while identical modes (e.g., both Mode 0 or both Mode 3) enable proper synchronization. The table below illustrates compatible and incompatible pairings:
Master ModeCompatible Slave ModesIncompatible Slave Modes
001, 2, 3
110, 2, 3
220, 1, 3
330, 1, 2

Many SPI peripherals support multiple modes, configurable through hardware registers to match the requirements of connected devices, with Mode 0 being the most commonly implemented due to its simplicity and widespread adoption in legacy systems.

Chip Select and Interrupts

The Chip Select (CS), also known as Slave Select (SS), serves as an active-low control signal in the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) to designate and enable a specific slave device for data exchange with the master. The master asserts the CS line low to activate the targeted slave, initiating the transaction, while deasserting it high concludes the exchange and places the slave's output in a high-impedance state to prevent bus contention. This mechanism ensures synchronous, full-duplex communication occurs exclusively between the master and the selected slave during the assertion period.
In multi-slave configurations, the master utilizes distinct CS lines, each connected to a general-purpose input/output (GPIO) pin, to individually address slaves without requiring additional hardware decoding. Software on the master manages these lines by asserting only the CS corresponding to the intended slave for each transaction, thereby supporting scalable bus architectures while maintaining isolation between devices.
Interrupts in SPI primarily support event-driven operation within controller modules but extend to basic signaling for transaction coordination between master and slave. From the master to the slave, the falling edge of the CS signal can generate an interrupt in the slave if supported by the hardware, alerting it to prepare for incoming data or to begin transmission synchronization. This edge detection leverages the CS assertion to trigger hardware interrupts for receive or transmit buffer management in the slave.
Slave-to-master signaling lacks a uniform protocol in core SPI specifications, relying instead on implementation-specific techniques such as toggling the Master In Slave Out (MISO) line with predefined patterns to indicate data availability or using a dedicated interrupt request (IRQ) line. A prevalent method involves the slave asserting a separate GPIO or IRQ pin low when data is ready for transmission, which the master monitors via its own interrupt handler to prompt an SPI read operation.
Overall, SPI's interrupt mechanisms for device coordination are not standardized beyond module-level flags for events like transfer completion or buffer status, resulting in vendor-dependent approaches that differ across microcontroller implementations from manufacturers like Texas Instruments and Microchip Technology. This flexibility accommodates diverse applications but requires careful design consideration for interoperability.

Software Implementation

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is commonly implemented in software through dedicated hardware controllers or bit-banging techniques, depending on the microcontroller's capabilities and application requirements. Hardware SPI controllers are integrated peripherals in many microcontrollers, providing efficient, high-speed communication without significant CPU overhead. For instance, the AVR family from Microchip includes an SPI module configurable via registers like SPCR for mode selection (e.g., master/slave, clock polarity/phase) and SPSR/SPCR for baud rate control, supporting clock rates derived from the system clock. Similarly, STM32 microcontrollers from STMicroelectronics feature SPI peripherals with registers such as SPI_CR1 for mode and baud rate settings, and SPI_CR2 for operational control, enabling full-duplex transfers. These controllers can achieve baud rates up to 100 Mbps in advanced implementations, though typical rates range from 1 to 50 MHz to ensure reliable signal integrity across short distances.
The baud rate in hardware controllers is calculated based on the system clock and prescaler values; for example, $ f_{SCK} = \frac{f_{clk}}{2 \times prescaler} $, where $ f_{clk} $ is the peripheral clock frequency and the prescaler divides it to set the desired SPI clock speed. This configuration allows developers to match the clock to peripheral device specifications, with common prescalers yielding rates like 8 MHz from a 16 MHz clock using a prescaler of 1. In STM32 devices, the formula aligns similarly, using the APB bus clock divided by a programmable prescaler (powers of 2 from 2 to 256).
When hardware controllers are unavailable or flexibility is needed (e.g., on pin-constrained devices), bit-banging emulates SPI using general-purpose I/O (GPIO) pins to toggle the clock (SCK), master-out-slave-in (MOSI), master-in-slave-out (MISO), and slave select (SS) lines manually in software. This approach is simple to implement but CPU-intensive, as it requires the processor to handle timing and data shifting for each bit, limiting throughput to a fraction of hardware capabilitiesoften below 1 MHz on low-end MCUs. Precise timing is critical in bit-banging to avoid protocol violations; developers typically insert delays between pin changes or use hardware timers for more accurate clock generation, as imprecise delays can cause data misalignment or missed edges.
A basic pseudocode example for an 8-bit full-duplex transfer in master mode (assuming mode 0: CPOL=0, CPHA=0) illustrates the process:
void spi_transfer(uint8_t tx_data, uint8_t* rx_data) {
 *rx_data = 0;
 digital_write(SS, LOW); // Assert slave select
 for (int i = 7; i >= 0; i--) {
 digital_write(MOSI, (tx_data >> i) & 1); // Set MOSI bit
 delay_us(half_period); // Setup time (clock low duration)
 digital_write(SCK, HIGH); // Clock high (rising edge)
 *rx_data |= (digital_read(MISO) << i); // Sample MISO on rising edge
 delay_us(half_period); // Clock high duration
 digital_write(SCK, LOW); // Clock low (falling edge)
 }
 digital_write(SS, HIGH); // Deassert slave select
}
This loop shifts out the transmit byte while shifting in the receive byte, with half_period tuned to half the desired clock period for a 50% duty cycle (e.g., via a timer interrupt for better precision).
To simplify development, libraries abstract these low-level details. The Arduino SPI library (SPI.h) provides functions like SPI.beginTransaction() for configuring modes and rates on supported boards, handling register setup internally. On Linux systems, the Python spidev module interfaces with the kernel's SPI driver for user-space access, offering methods like xfer() for data exchange and max_speed_hz for baud rate setting. These tools enable rapid prototyping while leveraging underlying hardware or software emulation.

Bus Configurations

Single Master-Multiple Slave

The single master-multiple slave configuration represents the conventional multidrop bus topology in SPI, enabling one master device to interface with multiple slave peripherals via a shared communication bus. This setup is widely used in embedded systems where the master, often a microcontroller, coordinates data exchange with several devices simultaneously connected but addressed individually.
In terms of wiring, the serial clock (SCK), master-out slave-in (MOSI), and master-in slave-out (MISO) lines are common to all slaves, while the master provides a dedicated slave select (SS) line to each slave from its general-purpose input/output (GPIO) pins. This parallel connection allows full-duplex communication on the shared lines without requiring additional wiring beyond the individual SS signals.
Slave selection occurs when the master drives the target SS line low (active low in most implementations), deasserting all other SS lines to high; this activates only the intended slave for the transaction, ensuring orderly access to the bus. To prevent bus contention on the shared MISO line, non-selected slaves must tri-state their MISO outputs, isolating them from the bus during inactive periods.
The maximum number of slaves is primarily constrained by the availability of GPIO pins on the master for distinct SS lines, commonly supporting 8 to 16 devices in typical microcontroller setups, though capacitive loading from additional slaves may necessitate speed reductions to maintain signal integrity.
Capacitive loading on the bus increases with the number of connected slaves and trace lengths, potentially degrading signal rise/fall times and requiring an extended clock period or lower frequencies; to mitigate this, bus lengths are generally limited to under 30 cm, and pull-up resistors (typically 10 k) are often added to the MISO line for stability.
A representative example involves a microcontroller master connected to four slaves: an EEPROM for non-volatile storage, an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) for signal acquisition, a temperature sensor for environmental monitoring, and an LCD display for output visualization, all sharing the bus lines with individual SS controls.

Daisy Chain and Expander Setups

In daisy chain configurations for the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), multiple slave devices are interconnected in a linear series, with the serial data output (often denoted as MISO or DOUT) of one slave connected to the serial data input (MOSI or DIN) of the subsequent slave, while all slaves share a single chip select (SS) line, clock signal (SCLK), and ground. This setup allows the master to transmit data that propagates sequentially through the chain, where each clock cycle shifts bits one position forward, requiring the master to send a data frame equal in length to the total number of bits across all slaves. Upon deassertion of the SS line, each slave latches the appropriate portion of the shifted data for execution, enabling synchronized operation without individual addressing.
Common use cases for daisy chaining include LED drivers and shift registers, such as the 74HC595 serial-in/parallel-out shift register, which is frequently chained to expand output capabilities for driving multiple LEDs or displays with minimal master pins. In such setups, the total effective bit width equals the number of slaves multiplied by the bits per slave; for instance, chaining ten 74HC595 devices (each handling 8 bits) creates an 80-bit shift register capable of controlling 80 outputs simultaneously. This contrasts briefly with shared bus configurations, where multiple slaves connect in parallel to the same lines but require separate SS signals for selection.
Expander configurations utilize dedicated SPI I/O expander chips, such as the Microchip MCP23S17, to augment the master's general-purpose input/output (GPIO) pins by adding up to 16 bidirectional ports per device over the SPI bus. The MCP23S17 interfaces via standard SPI signals (CS, SCK, SI, SO) and supports up to eight devices on the same bus through three hardware address pins (A0-A2), allowing selection via a control byte in the SPI transaction without needing multiple dedicated SS lines, though additional expanders beyond eight may require multiplexing or separate CS groups. Configuration occurs through internal registers like IODIRA/B for direction control and GPIOA/B for data, operating at speeds up to 10 MHz in SPI modes 0,0 or 1,1.
These setups offer key advantages, including a significant reduction in required master pinsoften limiting to just SCLK, a chained MOSI/MISO path, and one SSthereby simplifying wiring and enabling scalability in pin-constrained embedded systems. However, disadvantages include increased latency for non-terminal slaves, as data must propagate through preceding devices (scaling linearly with chain length), and potential error propagation, where a fault in one slave can corrupt data for all downstream devices. Additionally, expanders like the MCP23S17 introduce minimal overhead with low standby current (1 A maximum) but require compatible slaves supporting pass-through shifting for chaining.

Multidrop and Shared Bus Variants

In multidrop configurations of the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), multiple slaves share the clock (SCLK), master-out slave-in (MOSI), and master-in slave-out (MISO) lines, while each slave typically receives a dedicated chip select (SS) line from the master to enable individual selection and prevent bus contention on MISO. Slaves without dedicated SS lines require tri-state capability on their MISO outputs, placing them in a high-impedance state when inactive to allow only the selected slave to drive the line. This shared bus topology supports multiple slaves, typically limited to 8-16 in practice by the availability of chip select lines on the master, with capacitive loading and signal integrity affecting achievable bus speed and length, but demands precise timing to avoid data corruption.
Shared bus variants extend this by enabling bidirectional operation on the data lines, often in a 3-wire mode where MOSI and MISO are combined into a single bidirectional line (SDIO or SISO), alongside SCLK and SS. This half-duplex configuration reduces pin count for space-constrained applications but prohibits simultaneous transmit and receive, with the master controlling direction via SS assertion or protocol commands. Tri-state buffers or internal drivers ensure the inactive direction does not interfere, maintaining bus integrity across multiple slaves.
To implement addressing in setups with a shared SS line, expander integrated circuits (ICs) facilitate selection without dedicated lines per slave. For instance, SPI-controlled multiplexers like the ADG728 CMOS analog matrix switch use serial commands to route signals to specific channels, effectively addressing slaves by switching connections dynamically and minimizing master GPIO requirements. Similarly, SPI-to-IC bridges allow protocol conversion, enabling IC-style addressing (e.g., 7-bit slave IDs) over an SPI backbone for multidrop extension. These ICs support up to 8 or more channels, with low on-resistance for analog signals in mixed setups.
Such variants face challenges including the lack of inherent collision detection, as SPI relies on master-driven timing without arbitration, potentially leading to errors if slaves erroneously drive MISO. Additionally, software decoding of addresses or switching introduces latencytypically 1-2 clock cycles for tri-state control plus decoding timecompared to hardware SS selection, impacting real-time performance in high-speed applications.
A practical example appears in industrial sensor networks, where multiple remote sensors (e.g., temperature or pressure devices) connect via a shared SPI bus over extended distances, using an initial address byte on MOSI to select the target sensor before data exchange; bridges like the DS28E18 extend this to multidrop topologies with 1-Wire addressing for multiple devices (up to 10 or more, depending on configuration).

Advantages and Limitations

Key Advantages

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) offers high data transfer speeds, typically ranging from several megabits per second up to over 100 Mbps in full-duplex mode, making it significantly faster than alternatives like IC (limited to 100-400 kbps in standard and fast modes) or UART (often capped at 115 kbps in typical implementations). This capability stems from SPI's synchronous nature, where a dedicated clock signal enables efficient bit-stream transmission without the overhead of asynchronous synchronization or multi-device addressing protocols.
SPI's simplicity arises from its minimal protocol overhead, lacking start/stop bits, parity checks, or built-in addressing mechanisms, which are handled instead by individual chip select (CS) lines for each slave device. This design facilitates straightforward hardware implementation using just four wires (clock, master-out-slave-in, master-in-slave-out, and CS), reducing complexity in both master and slave controllers compared to the multi-byte addressing required in IC or the baud rate matching in UART. As a result, SPI is particularly efficient for point-to-point or short-bus communications where direct, low-latency exchanges are prioritized.
The full-duplex and synchronous operation of SPI allows simultaneous bidirectional data flow synchronized by the master's clock, enhancing efficiency for real-time applications such as sensor data acquisition or audio streaming, where IC's half-duplex nature introduces delays. Furthermore, SPI provides flexibility through support for variable data frame sizes (commonly 8 to 16 bits) and easy integration of multiple slaves without complex arbitration, as each is independently selected via dedicated CS pins. This adaptability contrasts with UART's fixed asynchronous framing or IC's reliance on shared addressing.
SPI's cost-effectiveness is evident in its requirement for few pins and no external clock sources for slaves, as they derive timing directly from the master's clock signal, minimizing additional components like crystals or oscillators needed in asynchronous protocols. This lean architecture lowers both implementation costs and power consumption in resource-constrained systems, while maintaining robust performance over short distances without the need for pull-up resistors as in IC.

Principal Disadvantages

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) lacks built-in addressing mechanisms, requiring a dedicated chip select (CS) line for each slave device in multi-slave configurations, which increases pin count and limits scalability in systems with many peripherals. This design also does not natively support multi-master operation, as the protocol assumes a single master to control the clock and initiate transfers, necessitating additional arbitration hardware for any multi-master setups.
SPI is constrained to short distances, typically 1-2 meters without signal conditioning, due to its single-ended signaling which is susceptible to electromagnetic interference and signal degradation over longer cables. Beyond this range, noise pickup and propagation delays can cause data errors unless differential drivers or repeaters are employed.
The protocol provides no inherent error detection or correction, such as parity bits or cyclic redundancy checks (CRC), making it vulnerable to transmission glitches that go undetected without external filtering or software checks. Additionally, SPI lacks acknowledgment mechanisms, so the master has no confirmation of successful data reception by the slave.
In power-sensitive applications, SPI can consume more energy than alternatives like IC, primarily due to its use of multiple signal lines (MOSI, MISO, SCLK, and CS) and support for higher clock speeds, which increase active pin toggling and overall current draw in embedded systems. Continuous clocking during transfers further contributes to higher power usage in battery-powered devices.
SPI's implementation varies across vendors, as there is no formal standardization body or specification defining clock modes, timing, or electrical characteristics uniformly, leading to potential interoperability issues between devices from different manufacturers.

Common Applications

Embedded Systems and Microcontrollers

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is ubiquitous in modern microcontrollers, serving as a standard peripheral for interfacing with external devices in embedded systems. Major microcontroller families, including ARM Cortex-M series from vendors like STMicroelectronics and NXP, Microchip's PIC and AVR architectures, integrate dedicated SPI hardware modules to enable efficient communication with sensors and actuators. For instance, the Bosch BMP280 barometric pressure sensor commonly connects via SPI to these MCUs for precise environmental data acquisition in compact designs.
In real-time control applications, SPI facilitates rapid data polling and synchronization essential for time-sensitive operations. Automotive electronic control units (ECUs) leverage SPI to interface with sensors and actuators for engine management and safety systems, ensuring low-latency responses in dynamic environments. Similarly, in Internet of Things (IoT) devices, SPI enables fast communication between microcontrollers and peripherals like accelerometers, supporting efficient data collection in battery-constrained networks.
Practical examples highlight SPI's versatility in hobbyist and prototyping platforms. The Raspberry Pi utilizes its onboard SPI interface for GPIO expansion via chips like the Microchip MCP23S08, allowing additional input/output pins for controlling LEDs, relays, or custom circuits without taxing the limited native GPIO resources. On Arduino boards, SPI connects to SD card modules for data logging, enabling storage of sensor readings or program states in portable projects.
To optimize energy efficiency in battery-powered embedded devices, many microcontrollers incorporate low-power SPI modes that align with sleep states, minimizing current draw during idle periods while allowing quick wake-up for peripheral interactions. For example, Texas Instruments' MSP430 series supports SPI operation in low-power modes, extending battery life in wearables and remote sensors.

Data Storage and Displays

Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) plays a crucial role in data storage applications, particularly with NOR and NAND flash memory chips, where it enables efficient command-based access for reading and writing code and data. NOR flash devices, such as the Winbond W25Q series, provide reliable, random-access storage suitable for executable code and configuration data, supporting standard SPI operations with opcodes for tasks like page reads, program, and sector erases. These chips typically operate at clock frequencies up to 104 MHz in single SPI mode, allowing for straightforward integration in embedded storage scenarios.
SPI NAND flash, exemplified by Winbond's W25N series, extends storage capacity for denser data applications while maintaining compatibility with SPI protocols, including buffer reads and continuous read modes for sequential access. These devices use command structures similar to NOR flash but incorporate NAND-specific features like page-based operations and error correction, achieving read throughputs of up to 52 MB/s in practical implementations. SD and MMC cards also leverage SPI mode for low-speed file system access, supporting clock rates up to 25 MHz to enable simple, cost-effective data logging and transfer without dedicated high-speed controllers.
In display applications, SPI facilitates the transfer of pixel data to TFT LCD and OLED panels, enabling compact, low-pin-count interfaces for graphical output. OLED drivers like the SSD1306 support SPI for writing bitmap data to an internal 128x64 frame buffer, where each byte controls eight vertical pixels in a column-addressed manner, often paired with DMA for burst transfers to minimize CPU overhead. Similarly, TFT LCD controllers such as the ILI9341 use SPI to stream RGB pixel values to a 240x320 resolution display, supporting frame buffer updates for dynamic content rendering in portable devices.
SPI flash memory is integral to bootloader implementations, storing initial firmware for system initialization and enabling over-the-air updates in networked devices. In routers, such as Ubiquiti EdgeRouters, SPI NOR flash holds multi-stage bootloaders that load subsequent firmware images, facilitating recovery and upgrades via serial access. Digital cameras, including models from D-Link, utilize SPI flash for persistent storage of firmware and settings, allowing in-field updates while maintaining boot integrity. The full-duplex nature of SPI enhances efficiency in these bidirectional operations, such as verifying update integrity during writes.

Protocol Variations

Standard and Timing Extensions

The original specification for the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), as outlined in Motorola's Application Note AN991, defined fixed 8-bit frame transfers with data shifted most significant bit (MSB) first and no built-in flow control beyond the slave select (SS) signal. The original specification supported configurable clock polarity (CPOL) and phase (CPHA), with mode 0 (CPOL=0, CPHA=0) being a common configuration where the clock idles low and data is sampled on the first rising edge.
Subsequent extensions in microcontroller implementations have introduced variable transmission sizes, typically configurable from 4 to 32 bits through controller registers, allowing flexibility for different peripherals without fixed 8-bit limitations. Additionally, options for least significant bit (LSB)-first or MSB-first shifting have been added, controlled by bits in the SPI control registers to match specific device requirements.
Timing variations include support for half-duplex operation, where only one data line (MOSI or MISO) is used for unidirectional transfers, effectively disabling the bidirectional full-duplex nature of standard SPI.
In some variants, particularly for multidrop configurations with sensors, address-based selection replaces dedicated SS lines; the master sends an address byte over the data lines to target a specific slave, reducing pin count at the expense of added protocol overhead.
Hardware extensions often involve standardized pinouts for interconnects, such as 2x2 headers arranging SCK, MOSI, MISO, and SS for easy breadboard prototyping. To bridge voltage domains, level shifters are commonly used for interfacing 5V-tolerant masters with 3.3V slaves, preventing signal damage while maintaining compatibility.

Multi-Bit and High-Speed Modes

To enhance throughput beyond the standard single-data-line configuration of the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), multi-bit modes extend the protocol by utilizing additional bidirectional I/O lines for parallel data transfer during specific phases of communication. These modes maintain the core SPI signalsclock (SCK), chip select (CS), and serial datawhile repurposing extra pins to increase bandwidth, particularly in applications requiring faster access to memory devices like NOR flash. Dual and quad variants are the most prevalent, offering scalable performance improvements without necessitating a complete redesign of the interface.
Dual SPI mode employs two bidirectional data lines, typically designated as IO0 and IO1, to transmit or receive two bits per clock cycle during the address and data phases. This configuration effectively doubles the bandwidth compared to standard SPI, enabling throughput rates around 20 Mbps in typical implementations. It is configured via specific commands, such as 0xBB for dual I/O fast read, and supports half-duplex operation while remaining compatible with existing SPI hardware.
Quad SPI (QSPI) further advances this by leveraging four bidirectional data lines (IO0 through IO3), allowing up to four bits per clock cycle in the data phase and achieving approximately four times the throughput of single-line SPI. Commonly integrated in flash memory controllers, QSPI supports commands like 0xEB for quad input/output fast read, and at an 80 MHz clock frequency, it can deliver around 40 MB/s in single data rate (SDR) mode. Vendor-specific implementations, such as Spansion's (now Infineon) Quad Peripheral Interface (QPI), extend this by transmitting the instruction, address, and data phases all in 4-bit parallel format (4-4-4 mode), requiring explicit enabling via configuration registers for seamless high-speed operation.
High-speed enhancements like double data rate (DDR) mode complement multi-bit configurations by sampling data on both the rising and falling edges of the clock signal, effectively doubling the transfer rate without raising the clock frequency. When combined with quad modes, DDR can yield bandwidths up to 80 MB/s at 80 MHz clocks in 1.8 V devices, or higher in advanced implementations. These modes often operate in SDR by default but can switch to DDR via device-specific commands.
A key advantage of multi-bit and high-speed modes is their backward compatibility with standard single-line SPI, using the same pinout for core signals and additional I/O lines only when needed. The command phase typically remains single-line to ensure interoperability, with the controller issuing a mode-entry command before shifting to dual or quad data transfer, allowing legacy devices to coexist on the bus.

Related Protocols and Enhancements

The Microwire protocol, developed by National Semiconductor, is a three-wire synchronous serial interface that operates in full-duplex mode, utilizing a serial clock (SK), serial data output (SO), and serial data input (SI) without a dedicated chip select line for individual slaves. This variant simplifies wiring compared to standard four-wire SPI while maintaining compatibility with master-slave communication for peripherals like EEPROMs in embedded systems.
Microwire/Plus extends the original protocol by adding a busy signal line to indicate slave readiness and supporting variable word lengths up to 16 bits per transfer, enabling more efficient handling of asynchronous operations in microcontroller applications. These enhancements reduce protocol overhead in scenarios requiring precise timing control, such as in National Semiconductor's COP8 microcontroller family.
Three-wire SPI variants omit either the master-out slave-in (MOSI) or master-in slave-out (MISO) line, resulting in a unidirectional, half-duplex configuration that combines data lines into a single bidirectional path alongside the clock and chip select signals. This approach is commonly used in space-constrained devices like displays or sensors, where full-duplex capability is unnecessary, though it limits simultaneous bidirectional data flow.
SafeSPI, an open standard extension for automotive and IoT applications, incorporates AES-128 encryption and authentication mechanisms to secure data transmission against tampering and eavesdropping, achieving ASIL B functional safety compliance. The protocol standardizes 32-bit or 48-bit frame lengths with built-in cyclic redundancy checks (CRC) for error detection, making it suitable for safety-critical sensor networks in vehicles.
High-reliability enhancements to SPI often include CRC polynomials for data integrity verification and watchdog timers to detect and recover from communication timeouts, particularly in aerospace environments where bit errors from radiation or noise are prevalent. For instance, ESA-prototyped space-grade SPI protocols append 16-bit CRCs to frames and implement redundant clocking to ensure transmission reliability exceeding 99.999% in harsh conditions. These features mitigate single-event upsets without altering the core SPI timing.
Intelligent SPI controllers in modern microcontrollers integrate direct memory access (DMA) engines and first-in first-out (FIFO) buffers to offload CPU involvement, allowing burst transfers up to several kilobytes without interrupt overhead. This is evident in devices like NXP's LPC series, where DMA reduces latency in high-throughput applications such as data logging, while FIFOs (typically 16-64 words deep) buffer data to handle clock domain mismatches.
Other SPI-related protocols include Serial GPIO (SGPIO), a four-wire bus for low-speed status signaling in storage enclosures, such as LED drive and fault indication, standardized by SNIA for SAS/SATA backplanes. Intel's enhanced SPI (eSPI) serves as a low-pin-count replacement for the legacy LPC bus, multiplexing virtual channels over a two-wire serial link for firmware access and sideband communications in PCs. JTAG (IEEE 1149.1) provides an alternative serial interface for boundary-scan testing and debugging, often used interchangeably with SPI in development flows but focused on in-system programmability rather than general data exchange.

Development and Debugging

Hardware Tools and Adapters

USB to SPI adapters provide a convenient bridge between personal computers and SPI-enabled devices, enabling prototyping and testing without dedicated hardware. The FT232H from FTDI Chip offers a single-channel USB 2.0 Hi-Speed interface configurable for SPI master operation, supporting all four standard SPI clock modes (0-3) with data rates up to 30 MHz in synchronous FIFO mode. Similarly, the CH341 chipset, commonly used in low-cost adapters, supports SPI master operation, compatible with standard modes, with compatibility for USB 2.0 full-speed operation and voltage levels of 3.3V or 5V. These adapters typically include GPIO pins for chip select (CS) and interrupt signals, facilitating direct connection to peripherals like sensors or EEPROMs.
Single-board computers such as the Raspberry Pi and BeagleBone Black integrate SPI interfaces directly on their GPIO expansion headers, simplifying embedded development. The Raspberry Pi models (e.g., Pi 4 and 5) feature two SPI buses on the 40-pin header, with pins 19 (MISO), 21 (MOSI), 23 (SCLK), and 24 (CE0) for the primary bus, operating at up to 125 MHz but typically clocked at 3.3V logic levels. The BeagleBone Black provides two SPI instances (SPI0 and SPI1) on its 92-pin P8 and P9 headers, such as P9.31 (SPI0 SCLK) and P9.29 (SPI0 D0), supporting up to 48 MHz and configurable via device tree overlays for 3.3V operation. These headers allow straightforward wiring to SPI slaves, often requiring only enabling the interface in the OS configuration.
Breakout boards enhance SPI connectivity by addressing voltage mismatches and bus expansion needs. Logic level converters, such as the bi-directional TXB0108E module, enable safe interfacing between 3.3V microcontrollers and 5V peripherals by shifting signals on MOSI, MISO, SCLK, and CS lines without direction control pins. For multi-device setups, SPI multiplexers like the CD74HC4067 16-channel analog/digital breakout board route signals to multiple slaves via addressable selection, operating at 3.3V to 5V and supporting SPI ADCs or sensors by multiplexing data lines. These boards often include pull-up resistors and decoupling capacitors to ensure signal integrity.
Connectors for SPI applications vary by device type, with IDC (Insulation Displacement Connector) headers being standard for breadboard prototyping on 2.54 mm pitch GPIO expansions, rated for 3.3V to 5V signals. For compact displays and modules, FPC (Flexible Printed Circuit) connectors, such as 18-pin 0.5 mm pitch variants, provide slim, high-density links for SPI TFT or OLED screens, typically limited to 3.3V operation to avoid damaging thin-film traces. SPI wiring generally follows a master-slave topology with dedicated lines for each, as referenced in standard bus configurations.
Hardware tools, including the Saleae Logic Pro 16 (released in 2014, with updates in 2022), offer advanced USB-based logic analysis for SPI debugging with 16 channels, 500 MS/s sampling, and built-in protocol decoders for modes 0-3, capturing up to 100 MHz signals at an accessible price point for professionals. This analyzer includes analog inputs shared with digital channels, aiding in mixed-signal SPI verification on prototypes. In 2025, Total Phase released high-speed IC and SPI analysis applications for the Promira Serial Platform, supporting advanced protocol decoding and monitoring.

Software Simulators and Analyzers

Software simulators for the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) enable engineers to model and verify protocol behavior without physical hardware. LTspice, a free SPICE-based tool from Analog Devices, supports analog timing simulations for SPI signals, allowing users to analyze clock skew, signal integrity, and noise effects in circuit designs. For digital aspects, hardware description languages like Verilog and VHDL are commonly used to create SPI master and slave models, simulated with tools such as ModelSim from Siemens EDA, which provides cycle-accurate verification of data transmission and mode configurations. Open-source options include Icarus Verilog for compiling and simulating Verilog-based SPI testbenches, facilitating rapid prototyping in FPGA development environments.
Protocol analyzers decode captured SPI frames to aid debugging, focusing on signal alignment and transaction integrity. Saleae Logic software includes a built-in SPI analyzer that decodes clock (SCK), data (MOSI/MISO), and slave select (SS) lines, with triggers configurable on SS edges to isolate specific device communications. Mixed-signal oscilloscopes enhance this capability; for instance, Tektronix models like the 5 Series MSO offer automated SPI decoding and triggering on events such as frame errors or specific byte values, combining analog waveform viewing with digital protocol overlays. Similarly, Keysight's Infiniium series with the N5391B option provides hardware-accelerated IC/SPI decoding, enabling time-correlated views of protocol violations across multiple channels.
Open-source tools extend accessibility for SPI analysis. Sigrok's PulseView frontend, paired with libsigrokdecode, supports SPI protocol decoding from various logic analyzers, extracting MOSI/MISO bytes and identifying mode-dependent timing (e.g., CPOL/CPHA) in captured sessions. For higher-layer integration, captures from SPI analyzers can be exported to Wireshark using plugins or utilities, allowing dissection of encapsulated protocols like IPMI over SPI in embedded systems.
Best practices for SPI software debugging emphasize comprehensive capture and error detection to ensure reliable verification. Engineers should configure analyzers to record full transactions, including preamble SS assertions and mode-specific clock polarities/phases, to validate sequence integrity across SPI modes 0-3. Glitch detection is critical; tools like Saleae's software glitch filter mitigate false triggers from noise, while oscilloscope features in Keysight and Tektronix instruments highlight timing anomalies such as runt pulses or overshoots that could corrupt data. Prioritizing non-intrusive logging and iterative simulation helps isolate issues like bit misalignment before hardware integration.

Terminology and Standards

Alternative Names and Definitions

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is commonly referred to interchangeably as the "SPI bus" or "SPI interface" in technical documentation and datasheets, with "bus" emphasizing the shared communication pathway among multiple devices and "interface" highlighting the connection protocol between a controller and peripherals. This dual nomenclature arises from its role as a synchronous serial communication standard, originally developed by Motorola in the mid-1980s as a proprietary module for microcontrollers. Over time, as the technology became widely adopted beyond Motorola's ecosystemnow under NXP Semiconductorsthe term has evolved from the full "Serial Peripheral Interface" to more generic descriptors like "SPI serial interface" or simply "serial interface" in modern hardware references, reflecting its de facto standardization without formal oversight.
In some contexts, particularly older microcontroller documentation, SPI is occasionally abbreviated or referred to as Synchronous Serial Interface (SSI), though this can lead to confusion since SSI typically denotes a distinct protocol used in industrial sensors like rotary encoders, which employs differential signaling and simplex operation rather than SPI's full-duplex, single-ended lines. Vendor-specific naming further complicates terminology; for instance, Motorola's original implementation was branded as the SPI module, while Freescale (now NXP) distinguished it from their Serial Communications Interface (SCI), which refers to asynchronous serial communication akin to UART rather than SPI's synchronous mode.
A frequent point of confusion involves distinguishing standard SPI from Quad SPI (QSPI), an enhanced variant that uses four data lines for parallel transfers instead of SPI's single bidirectional pair; while QSPI builds directly on SPI principles for higher throughput in applications like flash memory, it is not a separate protocol but an extension, leading some to mistakenly treat them as unrelated interfaces. Another common misconception is that SPI operates exclusively under master control with no slave agency, whereas although the master alone drives the clock and initiates transactions, slaves can effectively request communication by asserting dedicated interrupt lines to the master, prompting it to poll or read data. Additionally, SPI is sometimes erroneously associated with wireless communication, but it is strictly a wired, short-distance protocol limited to board-level or chip-to-chip connections without radio frequency components.

Standardization Efforts

The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) has historically functioned as a de facto standard, originally developed by Motorola in the mid-1980s without oversight from a centralized standards body, leading to widespread adoption through proprietary implementations in embedded systems and peripherals. Formal standardization efforts emerged primarily in the 2010s and accelerated into the 2020s, focusing on specific domains such as non-volatile memory and platform interfaces rather than a comprehensive protocol definition. These initiatives address interoperability challenges by defining discoverable parameters, extended modes, and compliance mechanisms, though gaps persist in areas like high-speed variants for automotive and IoT applications.
JEDEC has played a key role in partial formalization through memory-specific standards. The JESD216 standard, first published in 2011 and updated to revision B in 2016, establishes the Serial Flash Discoverable Parameters (SFDP) framework, enabling SPI-compatible NOR flash devices to self-describe their operational features, such as command sets, timing modes, and density, via a standardized database readable over the SPI bus. Later revisions, such as JESD216F (December 2021), incorporate support for xSPI profiles to enhance discoverability in high-speed modes. Building on this, JEDEC's JESD251C (published in May 2022) defines the eXpanded SPI (xSPI) specification for non-volatile memory devices, supporting higher data throughput up to several hundred MB/s through multi-bit modes while maintaining low pin counts. Intel's Enhanced SPI (eSPI) interface base specification, originally released in 2016 but integrated into client and server platforms post-2020 (e.g., 11th-generation Core processors and later), replaces legacy LPC buses with a multiplexed SPI-based architecture for peripherals like super I/O and ECs, emphasizing power efficiency and security features.
In automotive contexts, standardization efforts have emphasized functional safety compliance. For instance, high-speed SPI NOR flash devices, supporting dual/quad modes with data rates exceeding 100 MB/s, have achieved ISO 26262 ASIL-D certification as early as 2023, ensuring reliability in safety-critical systems like ADAS and infotainment, though broader protocol-level standards for double data rate (DDR) extensions remain vendor-specific. Compliance testing for mode interoperabilitysuch as clock polarity/phase (CPOL/CPHA) variations and multi-device daisy-chainingrelies on specialized tools like Soliton Technologies' SPI Protocol Validation Suite, which uses PXI-based hardware to automate electrical and protocol checks against de facto baselines.
Overall, while these efforts mitigate fragmentation, comprehensive IEEE or ISO standardization for core SPI remains absent, leaving room for further unification in high-impact areas like automotive and edge computing.

References

Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Devices - NXP Semiconductors

 spi.pdf - Microchip Technology

 Understanding the SPI Bus - Texas Instruments

Serial Bus Protocol Series: What is the Serial Peripheral Interface ...

SPI Tutorial - Corelis Inc.

What is SPI? Serial Peripheral Interface Explained | Arrow.com

None

 AN991/D: Using the Serial Peripheral Interface to Communicate ...

 M68HC11RM, M68HC11 - Reference Manual - NXP Semiconductors

https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/application-notes/AN-1248.pdf

Introduction to SPI Interface - Analog Devices

None

 Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) User Guide - Texas Instruments

Isolated SPI Communication Made Easy - Analog Devices

 Section 20. Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) - Microchip Technology

What is the SPI Protocol and How to Debug SPI Communication?

AN-1248: SPI Interface - Analog Devices

 TMS320x281x Serial Peripheral Interface Reference Guide

 Section 23. Serial Peripheral Interface - Microchip Technology

 SPI Block Guide V04.01 - Non-secure http index page

 Atmel AVR ATtiny441/841 Datasheet - Microchip Technology

46.7.1.1.1 Baud Rate Calculation Example - Microchip Online docs

 STM32G0-Peripheral-Serial-Peripheral-interface-SPI.pdf

Efficient Bit-Banged SPI Port for 8051-Compatible Microcontrollers

Ultra-High-Speed Flash Microcontroller Software SPI | Analog Devices

Arduino & Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI)

Documentation/spi/spidev - The Linux Kernel Archives

 AN2408 ATA583X/ATA578X Multi Slave SPI Application

Single Master and Multiple SPI Slaves - TI E2E - Texas Instruments

How many devices can be connected on SPI bus

TMS320F28379D: Maximum length of SPI bus at 40 Mbps - TI E2E

https://www.ni.com/en/support/documentation/supplemental/08/using-spi-with-labview-and-the-usb-8451.html

Daisy-Chaining SPI Devices

 Daisy Chain Implementation for Serial Peripheral Interface (Rev. A)

None

 MCP23017/MCP23S17 Data Sheet - Microchip Technology

ADG728 Datasheet and Product Info - Analog Devices

DS28E18 Setup Guide: Remote I2C/SPI Sensors w/ DS2485

I2C vs SPI vs UART Introduction and Comparison of their Similarities and Differences

 AN10216-01 I2C Manual - NXP Semiconductors

SPI Introduction - Microchip Developer Help

 Extending the SPI bus for long-distance communication

SPI Background - Total Phase

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10159889

SPI Tutorial With PIC Microcontrollers | Serial Peripheral Interface

AVR Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) - Microchip Developer Help

 BMP280 Digital Pressure Sensor | Bosch Sensortec

Serial Peripheral Interface: Meaning, Working, and Applications

Understanding SPI Protocol in IoT - Cavli Wireless

https://widgetlords.com/blogs/pi-spi-series/raspberry-pi-and-gpio-expansion-using-the-mcp23s08

A Complete Guide To Arduino and SD Card Interface

SPI low enable power consumption - TI E2E - Texas Instruments

2023 Microcontroller Industry Outlook - Yole Group

Serial NOR Flash - Code Storage Flash Memory - Winbond

 Winbond - W25X and W25Q SpiFlash Multi-I/O Memories

W25N01KW - Code Storage Flash Memory - Winbond

SD, SDHC & MMC device driver - emFile - SEGGER

 SSD1306 - Adafruit

Monochrome 0.96" 128x64 OLED Graphic Display - STEMMA QT

3.2" TFT LCD with Touchscreen Breakout Board w/MicroSD Socket

Repairing a bricked EdgeRouter - Benjamin Lafois's blog

Faster EEPROM firmware reads? Use a Pi! - Pen Test Partners

What are the Differences of Single vs Dual vs Quad SPI?

22.4.1.4 Variable Word Length Operation - Microchip Online docs

 TB3157 - Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Communications on 8-Bit ...

28.4.1 Clock Stretching - Microchip Online docs

Solved: Can PSoC SPI be configured to address multiple dev...

Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) - SparkFun Learn

Bi-Directional Logic Level Converter Hookup Guide - SparkFun Learn

 AN-452 MICROWIRE Serial Interface - Texas Instruments

 AN-579 MICROWIRE/PLUS Serial Interface - Texas Instruments

https://www.totalphase.com/support/articles/200350046-interfacing-with-3-wire-spi/

SafeSPI-CTRL | SafeSPI Controller IP Core - CAST, Inc.

 Prototyping of Space Protocol(s) for SPI - Indico at ESA / ESTEC

Application Research on Data Reliability of SPI Bus between ...

 AN5543 - Guidelines for enhanced SPI communication on STM32 ...

 Using the Cryptographic Service Engine (CSE) - NXP Semiconductors

 SFF-8485 Serial GPIO Bus - SNIA.org

 Enhanced Serial Peripheral Interface (eSPI) - Intel

20.4.6.3. National Semiconductor Microwire Protocol - Intel

 FT232H Single Channel Hi-Speed USB to Multipurpose UART/FIFO ...

CH341 USB To UART, I2C, SPI Parallel Breakout Board

Raspberry Pi SPI and I2C Tutorial - SparkFun Learn

How to Access Chips Over the SPI on BeagleBone Black - Linux.com

https://www.adafruit.com/product/395

SparkFun Analog/Digital MUX Breakout - CD74HC4067

100" Pitch IDC Terminals & Sockets (2.54 mm) - Samtec

https://www.adafruit.com/product/4905

https://saleae.com/products/logic-pro-16

Download LTspice | Analog Devices

Tools And Software For Digital Design | GenX TechY

Supported Verilog Simulators - User Manual - SIMPLIS

SPI Analyzer - User Guide - Saleae Support

5 Series B MSO 8 Channel Mixed Signal Oscilloscope - Tektronix

N5391B IC and SPI Protocol Triggering and Decode for Infiniium ...

Protocol decoder:spi - sigrok.org

https://www.totalphase.com/blog/2020/05/how-do-i-use-a-beagle-i2c-spi-protocol-analyzer-with-wireshark-for-ipmi-analysis/

https://support.saleae.com/user-guide/using-logic/software-glitch-filter

Debugging Common I2C and SPI Problems with Advanced ...

About SPI - Elm-chan.org

What is serial peripheral interface (SPI)? | Definition from TechTarget

SPI.h File Reference - Texas Instruments

Synchronous Serial Interface (SSI) - Hilscher

SCI and UART mean the same? - NXP Community

Can only the master initiate communication in SPI whereas in I2C ...

Serial Flash Discoverable Parameters (SFDP) - JEDEC

EXPANDED SERIAL PERIPHERAL INTERFACE (xSPI ... - JEDEC

GigaDevice's full range of automotive-grade SPI NOR Flash GD25 ...

SPI Protocol Validation Suite & Services - Soliton Technologies

Security of the Internet of Things: Perspectives and challenges

NIST Releases First 3 Finalized Post-Quantum Encryption Standards
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion