Softmodem Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Softmodem
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A softmodem, also known as a software modem or WinModem, is a type of modem that implements the core modulation and demodulation functions through software executed on the host computer's central processing unit (CPU), rather than relying on specialized hardware for signal processing. These devices typically feature minimal hardware components, including an analog telephone line interface and analog-to-digital (ADC) and digital-to-analog (DAC) converters, which handle basic signal conversion while the CPU manages computationally intensive tasks such as error correction, data compression, and protocol negotiation. Softmodems support various telecommunication standards, such as V.34, V.90, and Bell 103, enabling data transmission over analog phone lines at speeds up to 56 kbit/s in their classic dial-up implementations.
Softmodems first gained prominence in the late 1990s, as rising CPU performance in personal computers made it feasible to offload modem operations from dedicated digital signal processors (DSPs) or very-large-scale integration (VLSI) chipsets to general-purpose processors. Pioneering companies including U.S. Robotics, Motorola, and PCTel introduced early models like the PCTel HSP and Rockwell/Conexant HSF, often with proprietary, binary-only drivers optimized for Microsoft Windows, which contributed to the "WinModem" moniker. This shift was primarily motivated by cost reductions in hardware manufacturing, allowing modem producers to lower prices while enabling feature enhancements through software updates, such as improved fax capabilities or compatibility with emerging internet protocols. By the early 2000s, softmodems had become ubiquitous in consumer PCs during the peak of dial-up internet access, interfacing via serial ports, PCI slots, or USB connections to connect users to online services.
While softmodems offered economic advantages for manufacturers and flexibility for upgrades, they imposed significant demands on the host CPU, often consuming 10-15% or more of processing power during active useequivalent to about 14.7% sustained load on a 450 MHz Pentium II processorwhich could degrade overall system performance, particularly on older hardware. Interrupt-driven operations, such as those lasting up to 3.3 milliseconds during connection establishment, further challenged real-time predictability in multitasking environments. Despite these drawbacks, their low cost propelled widespread adoption, influencing the dial-up era's accessibility before broadband technologies like DSL and cable modems largely supplanted them in the mid-2000s.
The softmodem architecture has since evolved beyond dial-up, finding applications in software-defined radio (SDR) systems, satellite communications, and mobile networks, where programmable signal processing enhances adaptability and reduces hardware complexity. Open-source projects, including SpanDSP for DSP functions, LinModem for Linux compatibility, and ArduinoModem for embedded implementations, have democratized softmodem development, supporting standards like V.21 and V.23 for niche retrocomputing and IoT uses.

Definition and Operation

Core Concept

A softmodem, also known as a software modem, is a modem that performs the majority of its signal processing taskssuch as modulation, demodulation, error correction, and data compressionthrough software executed on the host computer's central processing unit (CPU), rather than relying on dedicated hardware chips for these functions. This design shifts the computational burden to the general-purpose processor of the connected device, enabling more flexible but resource-intensive operation.
In contrast to full hardware modems, which handle all processing internally using specialized components like microcontrollers and digital signal processors, softmodems employ minimal hardware, typically limited to a basic codec for analog-to-digital conversion and a simple line interface to connect to telephone lines. This reduction in onboard circuitry distinguishes softmodems by making them cheaper to produce while depending heavily on the host system's processing power, which can impact overall system performance during modem use.
The basic architecture of a softmodem includes a low-cost interface card or chipset, often connected via expansion slots like PCI or external ports such as USB, paired with proprietary software that interprets AT commands and manages the communication protocol stack.

Technical Functionality

Softmodems operate by leveraging software-based digital signal processing (DSP) to emulate the modulation and demodulation functions traditionally handled by dedicated hardware. The core process involves converting digital data packets into analog signals suitable for transmission over telephone lines, using an integrated codec in the softmodem hardware for analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion to handle audio input/output. This begins with sampling the analog signals at rates such as 8 kHz to capture the signal accurately, followed by digital filtering to remove noise and shape the waveform, and encoding via modulation schemes to map bits onto carrier waves. The resulting analog signal is then output through the codec's digital-to-analog converter (DAC) for transmission, while incoming signals undergo the reverse: analog-to-digital conversion (ADC), demodulation, filtering, and decoding back to digital data.
Key algorithms in softmodems center on standardized modulation, error correction, and compression techniques to ensure reliable data transfer. For modulation, the V.90 and V.92 standards enable downstream speeds up to 56 kbit/s using pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) with 8,000 symbols per second, where each symbol represents multiple bits through varying amplitude levels on a digital PCM uplink from the ISP. Error correction employs the V.42 protocol, which implements the Link Access Procedure for Modems (LAPM) as an automatic repeat request (ARQ) mechanism, detecting errors via cyclic redundancy checks (CRC) and retransmitting corrupted frames to maintain data integrity. Compression is handled by V.44 in V.92-compatible systems, utilizing a Lempel-Ziv-based LZJH algorithm that adaptively dictionaries repeated strings for lossless compression ratios up to 6:1, particularly effective for web content. A basic pseudocode example for the modulation flow illustrates this integration:
function modulateDigitalData(inputData):
 # Step 1: Encode data into symbols (e.g., bit-to-PAM mapping per V.90)
 symbols = encodeToSymbols(inputData, modulationScheme='V.90_PAM')
 
 # Step 2: Apply digital filtering (e.g., (/page/Anti-aliasing) (/page/Low-pass_filter))
 filteredSymbols = applyFilter(symbols, filterType='FIR_lowpass', sampleRate=8000)
 
 # Step 3: Sample and convert to analog via host (/page/Codec)/DAC
 analogSignal = sampleAndDAC(filteredSymbols, rate=8000)
 
 return analogSignal # Output to phone line
These algorithms are implemented using DSP libraries optimized for real-time execution on general-purpose processors.
Softmodem operations are highly CPU-intensive due to the real-time requirements of signal processing tasks, such as Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) for frequency-domain analysis during equalization and echo cancellation. On 1990s-era hardware like Pentium processors, these demands could consume around 15% of CPU cycles during active connections, equivalent to 14.7% sustained load on a 450 MHz Pentium II processor, limiting multitasking and necessitating optimized code to meet latency constraints under 10 ms per frame.
Integration with operating systems occurs through specialized drivers that manage data flow and hardware abstraction. In Windows, Windows Driver Model (WDM) miniport drivers handle the softmodem as a virtual serial device, processing interrupts for data buffering and interfacing with the Telephony API (TAPI) for call control. On Linux, drivers leverage the Advanced Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA) for sound card-based implementations or kernel modules like slmodem for buffering incoming/outgoing packets via pseudo-TTY interfaces, ensuring low-latency interrupt handling.

Historical Development

Origins and Early Innovations

The concept of software-based signal processing in softmodems was influenced by earlier developments in software-defined radio (SDR) for military applications in the early 1980s. In 1982, Ulrich L. Rohde's department at RCA created the first SDR under a U.S. Department of Defense contract, utilizing the COSMAC 8-bit CMOS microprocessor to enable programmable signal generation, interference cancellation, and modulation/demodulation for broadband signals. This innovation shifted radio functions from fixed hardware to flexible software, providing a foundational principle for later consumer technologies that offloaded processing from dedicated chips to general-purpose computers.
Consumer softmodem development began in the mid-1990s, building on the growing computational capabilities of personal computers and evolving modem standards. Rockwell International introduced its V.FastClass chipset in 1993, a hardware-based advancement supporting 28.8 kbps speeds as a proprietary precursor to the ITU V.34 standard. This helped drive higher-speed dial-up modems, setting the stage for cost-reducing innovations like softmodems. The "winmodem" approach, popularized by U.S. Robotics in their mid-1990s products, relied on host CPU resources for key functions like error correction and data compression, marking a departure from fully hardware-based modems.
The primary motivations for these early innovations were economic and technical: plummeting CPU prices and surging PC performance in the early 1990s made it feasible to repurpose host processors for modem tasks, reducing manufacturing costs by eliminating complex onboard electronics. This was particularly crucial for adapting to rapidly evolving standards, such as the ITU V.34 protocol ratified in 1994, which demanded sophisticated 28.8 kbps modulation schemes that traditional hardware struggled to implement affordably.
However, initial prototypes encountered notable hurdles, including elevated latency from software processing overhead and intensive CPU demands that often necessitated at least an Intel 486 processor for viable operation. These issues stemmed from the need for real-time signal handling, where even minor delays could disrupt connections, limiting early adoption to higher-end systems until optimizations improved efficiency.

Commercial Evolution

The commercialization of softmodems accelerated in the mid-1990s as manufacturers sought to reduce hardware costs by offloading modem processing to the host PC's CPU, leading to widespread adoption in consumer PCs. Rockwell Semiconductor Systems, holding approximately 80% of the modem chipset market, introduced its K56Flex technology in early 1997, supported by chipsets featuring Host Controlled Firmware (HCF) for software-based modulation and demodulation. Pioneering firms like PCTel also contributed with their Host Signal Processing (HSP) technology around this time. Lucent Technologies complemented this with its Venus chipset series, part of the competing K56Flex ecosystem, enabling similar host-based implementations for V.34 and early V.90 modems. Major PC vendors, including Dell and Compaq, integrated these chipsets into their systems during 19962000, bundling softmodems as standard features to capitalize on the demand for 56 kbps dial-up connectivity.
Standardization efforts resolved early compatibility challenges between proprietary 56 kbps formats like Rockwell/Lucent's K56Flex and U.S. Robotics' x2. In 1998, Intel released the Audio/Modem Riser (AMR) specification, a 46-pin slot on motherboards designed to simplify integration of low-cost softmodem and audio cards, further promoting adoption by OEMs. The ITU-T approved Recommendation V.92 in November 2000 as an enhancement to V.90, standardizing quick connect features and upstream speeds up to 48 kbps, which fully supported softmodem architectures and solidified 56 kbps as the dial-up norm.
Legal tensions marked this period, particularly a 1997 patent infringement lawsuit filed by inventor Brent Townshend against Rockwell, alleging misappropriation of his 56 kbps technology under a nondisclosure agreement; the suit targeted Rockwell's K56Flex implementation and indirectly affected U.S. Robotics, which had licensed Townshend's patents for its x2 standard. By 2001, softmodems accounted for nearly 40% of total modem shipments, dominating consumer markets amid peak dial-up usage. Their prevalence waned in the mid-2000s with the rise of broadband technologies like DSL and cable, which rendered dial-up obsolete for most home users, though softmodems persisted in embedded applications such as appliances and industrial devices for remote monitoring and control.

Classifications and Variants

Host-Based Softmodems

Host-based softmodems, also known as winmodems, are a primary variant of software modems that perform all digital signal processing taskssuch as modulation, demodulation, error correction, and data compressionentirely on the host computer's central processing unit (CPU) and operating system. The associated hardware is minimal, typically consisting only of a line interface for analog signal transmission and basic analog-to-digital (A/D) and digital-to-analog (D/A) conversion components, without dedicated digital signal processors (DSPs). This design shifts the computational burden to the host, enabling lower hardware costs but requiring robust software drivers to manage real-time processing demands.
Prominent examples of host-based softmodems include Rockwell's High-Speed Fax (HSF) series, introduced in 1997 as part of their Host Signal Processing (HSP) technology, which targeted V.34 and early V.90 standards for dial-up connections. ESS Technology also developed host-based designs, such as their V.90-compliant software modem chipsets like the ES2841/ES2842, which integrated modem functionality with other peripherals to reduce system costs in PCs. In open-source contexts, implementations like the slmodemd daemon, released in 2002 as a Linux kernel module, supported Smart Link softmodems by leveraging ALSA audio drivers for signal processing on compatible hardware.
These modems achieved variable data rates up to 56 kbit/s downstream under the V.90 standard, with upstream speeds limited to 33.6 kbit/s, though actual performance depended on line quality and buffering techniques to mitigate latency in real-time operations. On contemporary hardware like a Pentium III processor, they imposed CPU overhead of around 15% utilization during active connections, necessitating buffering and scheduling optimizations to prevent interruptions.
Compatibility with host-based softmodems relies heavily on platform-specific drivers integrated into the operating system's telephony architecture, such as Microsoft's Unimodem, which provides a universal interface for data and voice operations across standard modems via Telephony API (TAPI) support. This architecture allowed winmodems to function seamlessly on Windows platforms but often required custom ports, like those in Linux distributions, for cross-platform use.

Controller-Based Softmodems

Controller-based softmodems represent a hybrid approach within the broader category of softmodems, incorporating a dedicated microcontrolleroften an 8-bit RISC processorfor handling basic operations such as AT command parsing and echo cancellation, while offloading more computationally intensive tasks like modulation and demodulation to the host computer's CPU and software. This design leverages minimal hardware assistance to optimize resource allocation, distinguishing it from fully host-dependent variants by providing semi-autonomous processing for low-level functions. The microcontroller typically interfaces with the host via a standard bus like PCI, enabling efficient data exchange without requiring a full DSP for signal processing. Examples include certain Conexant HSF designs with integrated controllers for command handling.
This variant offers advantages in resource efficiency, imposing a reduced CPU load compared to pure host-based softmodems, thereby supporting better multitasking on contemporary systems. The presence of dedicated firmware also enables post-deployment updates to accommodate new modulation schemes or error-correction protocols, extending device longevity in evolving telecommunications environments. Overall, the hybrid nature promotes cost-effective production by minimizing onboard silicon while preserving performance reliability for dial-up connectivity.

Specialized Applications

DSL Softmodems

DSL softmodems adapt the host-based processing principles of traditional softmodems to digital subscriber line (DSL) technologies, such as asymmetric DSL (ADSL) and very-high-bit-rate DSL (VDSL), where software on the host device or router handles key functions like Discrete Multi-Tone (DMT) modulation and data interleaving. Unlike analog dial-up modems, these implementations integrate with network interface cards (NICs) or system-on-chip (SoC) solutions, minimizing dedicated hardware for the phone line interface while leveraging the host's CPU for digital signal processing. This approach enables cost-effective deployment over existing copper twisted-pair lines, supporting simultaneous voice and data transmission without interfering with plain old telephone service (POTS).
Key implementations emerged in the late 1990s, with Integrated Telecom Express introducing a host-based ADSL softmodem in 1999 that utilized Intel's Pentium III processor for modulation tasks, marking an early shift toward software-driven DSL connectivity. Motorola followed in 2000 with a software-based ADSL solution, offering 30-40% cost savings over hardware-based modems by offloading processing to the host CPU (requiring 550 MHz processors). These efforts aimed to reduce manufacturing costs and enable upgrades, but host-based DSL softmodems saw limited adoption due to high CPU loads and the rise of efficient hardware/SoC alternatives. By the mid-2000s, hybrid approaches contributed to lower-cost DSL equipment, though pure host-based designs remained niche before broadband technologies like fiber supplanted DSL.
Technically, DSL softmodems process framing protocols such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) or Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet (PPPoE) entirely in software, encapsulating IP traffic within DSL-specific overheads like RFC 1483 bridging. Early ADSL implementations achieved downstream speeds of up to 8 Mbit/s over distances up to 5.5 km, with upstream rates around 640 kbit/s, by dividing the available bandwidth into 256 subcarriers via DMT. Error correction is managed through Reed-Solomon codes applied to superframes on the host, correcting burst errors from line noise with an overhead of approximately 8%, ensuring reliable transmission without hardware accelerators.

Embedded and Mobile Implementations

Softmodems have found niche applications in embedded systems, particularly within Internet of Things (IoT) devices and routers, where hardware constraints necessitate software-based modulation and demodulation. In the 2010s, open-source projects demonstrated the feasibility of integrating softmodems into low-cost microcontrollers like Arduino for low-bandwidth communications via audio jacks. For instance, the SoftModem library enables frequency-shift keying (FSK) signal generation to transmit data through a device's audio output, facilitating wired connections between Arduino boards and mobile phones without dedicated hardware modems. This approach supports data rates up to 1200 baud, suitable for sensor data exchange in resource-limited environments such as remote monitoring setups.
In mobile devices, softmodems have been adapted to handle legacy cellular protocols, providing fallback connectivity in smartphones transitioning from older networks. Android-based implementations of GSM softmodems, leveraging software-defined radio (SDR), allow general-purpose processors to execute the full GSM protocol stack, emulating traditional hardware modems for 2G/3G compatibility pre-4G dominance. A notable example is the SoftModem library for Arduino, released around 2015-2016, which extends these principles to mobile-interfacing embedded projects by supporting audio-based FSK for short-range data transfer. These adaptations ensure uninterrupted voice and basic data services in areas with intermittent higher-speed coverage.
Deploying softmodems in embedded and mobile contexts presents challenges related to power consumption and computational efficiency, addressed through optimizations on ARM-based digital signal processors (DSPs). Software implementations utilize ARM Cortex-M cores with CMSIS-DSP libraries to perform modulation tasks like FSK or QAM at low energy, enabling prolonged battery life in portable IoT nodes. For legacy compatibility in remote sensors, these systems often support protocols such as Bell 103, which operates at 300 bps using audio FSK for full-duplex communication over analog lines, as implemented in microcontroller libraries like Microchip's dsPIC30F Soft Modem. This allows sensors in isolated locations to interface with existing telephony infrastructure without power-hungry hardware.
In the 2020s, softmodems have seen renewed interest in satellite IoT applications, particularly through SDR platforms that enable flexible, software-reconfigurable gateways for remote connectivity. These implementations facilitate Internet of Remote Things (IoRT) by processing satellite signals on embedded processors, reducing costs and enhancing adaptability for low-Earth orbit (LEO) networks in underserved areas. Such advancements support scalable deployments in agriculture and environmental monitoring, where softmodems handle protocol adaptations without specialized satellite hardware.

Performance Characteristics

Advantages

Softmodems offer substantial economic benefits through reduced hardware requirements, as they offload signal processing to the host computer's CPU rather than relying on dedicated chips, leading to lower manufacturing costs compared to traditional hardware modems. This design allowed manufacturers in the 1990s to utilize off-the-shelf PC components, simplifying production and enabling easier scalability for high-volume markets like consumer PCs. For high-volume applications exceeding 10,000 units, softmodems further minimize expenses via licensing models that include an initial fee plus per-unit royalties, avoiding the need for costly custom hardware development.
A key advantage of the software-centric architecture is upgradability, permitting enhancements to modem functionality through simple software or driver updates without replacing physical hardware. For instance, support for advanced standards like V.92, which improves upload speeds and connection times, could be implemented via driver patches, extending the lifespan of existing devices. This flexibility contrasts with hardware modems, where new features often require full redesigns, and it facilitates rapid adaptation to evolving telecommunications protocols.
Softmodems integrate seamlessly with operating system ecosystems, enhancing compatibility and enabling advanced features such as voice processing alongside data and fax capabilities in winmodems. This OS-level integration allows for customized applications, like combining modem operations with system audio for speakerphone functionality, reducing the need for separate peripherals. In winmodem implementations, this approach leverages Windows drivers to handle multiple communication tasks efficiently, promoting broader feature sets in consumer devices.
In contemporary embedded applications, softmodems demonstrate resource efficiency by exploiting multi-core CPUs for parallel processing, distributing tasks like modulation and error correction across cores to optimize performance without additional hardware. This capability results in smaller printed circuit board footprints, reduced power consumption, and lower overall system weight, making them ideal for compact devices such as IoT modules or mobile systems. By handling concurrent voice, fax, and data operations on shared processors, softmodems enhance scalability in resource-constrained environments.

Disadvantages

Softmodems impose significant resource demands on host systems due to their reliance on software for signal processing, often consuming 14.7% of CPU capacity on a 450 MHz Pentium II processor during sustained connections. This overhead can escalate to 25% or more on comparable hardware for variants like soft DSL modems, leading to noticeable system slowdowns, particularly when multitasking or on lower-end processors from the late 1990s and early 2000s. Additionally, they require substantial memory for data buffers and processing algorithms, exacerbating resource contention in memory-constrained environments.
Latency issues arise from software-based interrupt handling, with typical execution times of 1.8 ms and worst-case durations up to 3.3 msfar exceeding hardware modem benchmarks and industry standards like PC 99's 100 s guideline. Such delays, combined with processing in interrupt context, introduce jitter and unpredictability, resulting in higher packet loss rates during interruptions and reduced overall reliability compared to dedicated hardware solutions. Softmodems are particularly susceptible to host operating system instability, as crashes or priority inversions can halt modem functionality entirely, causing connection drops without hardware-level fault isolation.
Platform dependency further limits softmodem viability, with early implementations primarily optimized for Windows, leading to scant driver availability for alternative operating systems like Linux until community efforts provided partial open-source support around 2005. These drivers often involved complex binary blobs, contributing to bloat and compatibility challenges across distributions.
By the mid-2000s, the rise of broadband technologies rendered softmodems largely obsolete for mainstream use, as dial-up speeds capped at 56 kbps proved incompatible with the growing demand for high-speed connectivity, confining them to legacy applications.

References

Software Modems - Retronetworking - Open Source ... - Osmocom

Two Case Studies in Predictable Application Scheduling Using ...

Soft Modems: When Dial-Up Modems Got a Lot Lamer - Tedium

 NVIDIA SDR (Software Defined Radio) Technology The modem ...

NanoCom AX Softmodem - GOMspace

What are the different types of modems?

Definition of soft modem - PCMag

U.S. Robotics Inc. Business Information, Profile, and History

Case Study: V.26 Private Wire Soft-modem For The ... - NumerixDSP

 Embedded V.90 Modem Solution - Texas Instruments

https://www.itu.int/rec/dologin_pub.asp?lang=e&id=T-REC-V.90-199809-I!!PDF-E&type=items

V.90 Modem Software | V.90 SoftModem - VOCAL Technologies

https://www.itu.int/rec/dologin_pub.asp?lang=e&id=T-REC-V.42-199610-S!!PDF-E&type=items

V.42 / V.42bis Software - VOCAL Technologies

https://www.itu.int/rec/dologin_pub.asp?lang=e&id=T-REC-V.44-200011-I!!PDF-E&type=items

V.44 Data Compression Software | VOCAL Technologies

 Predictable Scheduling for a Soft Modem - Microsoft

56k modem advice | AnandTech Forums

Kernel-Mode Driver Architecture Design Guide - Microsoft Learn

Advanced Linux Sound Architecture - Driver Configuration guide

Linux drivers for Conexant chipsets - DGC (softmodem) driver

Software-defined radio | IEEE Communications Society

Modem-HOWTO - Ibiblio

 united states - Silicon Labs Investor Relations

Project: Record a US Robotics X2 Dial-Up Modem Connection

Conexant/GVC V.92 Soft Data Fax Voice Modem for Windows, v ...

What Is AMR (Audio/Modem Riser)? - Computer Hope

Rockwell Claims Suit Delays Standards Process - WIRED

 Access by PCTEL - Annual Reports

Embedded Modems Enable Appliances to Communicate with ...

Predictability requirements of a soft modem - ACM Digital Library

Winmodems - The Kermit Project

HSF (softmodem) driver - Linuxant

ESS combines V.90 modem, Ethernet on same chip - EE Times

slmodem - Debian Wiki

An Introduction to the 56K V.90 Software Modem - GAO Research Inc.

Unimodem TSP - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

56K dial-up modems - USR

Ambient(tm) SoftModem 3.x V.90 AMR (Intel) Driver Download

Motorola preps software-based DSL modem - EE Times

ADSL, VDSL, and Multicarrier Modulation | Wiley Online Books

Pentium III part of software DSL modems - CNET

TI DSP implementation of a medium speed DSL (MDSL) for ...

 AC6 ADSL Infrastructure Chipset - Texas Instruments

Alcatel and Texas Instruments team up on VDSL - EE Times

 Broadcom BCM63xx

ADSL overhead - ipSpace.net blog

A parallel Reed-Solomon coding/decoding structure for an ADSL ...

arms22/SoftModem: Audio Jack Modem Library for Arduino - GitHub

SoftModem - Arduino Documentation

Sensor Data to iPhone Through the Headphone Jack (Using Arduino)

Design and implementation of the GSM soft modem on android ...

https://doi.org/10.2495/ICCTS140121

CMSIS-DSP embedded compute library for Cortex-M and Cortex-A

Softmodems Bell103 - GAO Research Inc.

An SDR-Based Satellite Gateway for Internet of Remote Things ...

IoT Communications over Starlink Satellite

Predictable Scheduling for a Soft Modem - Stefan Saroiu

Softmodem: More Cost Effective and Beneficial than Modem Chipsets

 56K Voice Winmodem Internal

Understanding HSP and Controllerless WinModems - Cisco

Augmented CPU Reservations: Towards Predictable Execution on ...

Modem-HOWTO: Modems for a Linux PC

Part 1. Broadband Adoption in the United States
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion