Spaghetti code Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 1 month ago 
Spaghetti code
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Spaghetti code is a pejorative term in software engineering for source code characterized by a complex, tangled control structure that is difficult to follow, understand, or maintain, often resulting from excessive use of unstructured elements like GOTO statements and global variables. The term emerged in the 1970s during debates over structured programming, drawing a metaphor from the intertwined strands of spaghetti to depict the convoluted flow of execution in such code. This style of coding was particularly prevalent in early programming languages like FORTRAN and BASIC, where unrestricted jumps via GOTO led to unpredictable program paths, as highlighted in discussions following Edsger Dijkstra's 1968 critique of the GOTO statement.
Historically, spaghetti code arose from the limitations of pre-structured programming paradigms, where developers prioritized rapid implementation over modularity, often under tight deadlines or with limited tools for abstraction. In modern contexts, while high-level languages and frameworks mitigate some risks, spaghetti code persists in web applications and large codebases, resembling the "spaghetti code wars" of the 1970s but adapted to contemporary paradigms like dynamic scripting.

Definition and Characteristics

Core Meaning

Spaghetti code refers to source code in which control flow is convoluted and difficult to follow, often due to excessive use of unstructured jumps such as GOTO statements, deeply nested loops, or irregular branching that creates a tangled, non-linear structure. This term emerged in the context of early programming practices where such constructs led to programs resembling a mass of intertwined strands, making it challenging to trace execution paths without external aids like flowcharts.
The core implications of spaghetti code lie in its severe impact on software quality: it drastically reduces readability, thereby prolonging debugging efforts as developers struggle to predict or isolate errors in the erratic flow. Furthermore, it impedes collaborative development by complicating code comprehension for team members, who must decipher opaque logic to contribute or maintain the system, often leading to increased error introduction during modifications. In contrast, spaghetti code stands in opposition to structured programming paradigms, which emphasize modular design, clear hierarchies, and predictable control structures to enhance overall maintainability and reliability.
The metaphor of "spaghetti" originates from the visual analogy of code paths that jump erratically across the program, akin to disentangling a single noodle from a bowl of pasta, where logical progression becomes nearly impossible to follow without diagramming the entire structure. This analogy underscores the fundamental challenge of tracing dependencies in unstructured code, highlighting why such practices were largely abandoned in favor of disciplined approaches following influential critiques in the late 1960s.

Key Identifying Features

Spaghetti code is distinguished by its irregular control flow, which often relies heavily on unstructured jumps such as the GOTO statement or equivalent constructs in languages like BASIC and early C, resulting in non-linear execution paths that resemble tangled strands rather than a clear sequence. This practice, criticized since the 1960s for enabling convoluted logic, disrupts predictable program execution and complicates debugging.
Additional indicators include deep nesting of conditional statements and loops, frequently exceeding two or three levels without modular decomposition, which obscures logical boundaries and increases cognitive load for readers. Overuse of global variables further exacerbates this by creating implicit dependencies across distant code sections, allowing unintended modifications that propagate errors unpredictably. The absence of functions or procedures for code reuse compounds these issues, leading to repetitive and monolithic implementations that hinder maintainability.
Metrics provide quantitative ways to identify spaghetti code, with high cyclomatic complexitya measure of independent paths through the codeserving as a primary indicator; scores exceeding 10 often signal potential tangles, while values above 15 typically warrant refactoring. Similarly, methods or routines surpassing 100 lines without defined entry and exit points exemplify excessive length, correlating with untestable complexity and reduced comprehension. These thresholds, derived from established software engineering analyses, highlight structural deficiencies that elevate defect rates and maintenance costs.

Historical Development

Origins in Early Programming

The term "spaghetti code" first appeared in programming discourse during the 1960s, amid growing criticism of unstructured code in early high-level languages like FORTRAN and BASIC, which permitted extensive use of unconditional jumps akin to assembly language programming. These languages, introduced in the late 1950s and 1960s, facilitated rapid development but often resulted in programs with convoluted control flows due to frequent GOTO statements that obscured logical progression.
A pivotal influence was the structured programming movement, sparked by the 1966 theorem of Corrado Bhm and Giuseppe Jacopini, which mathematically demonstrated that any computable algorithm could be expressed using only three structured control primitives: sequence, selection, and iteration, without reliance on arbitrary jumps. This work laid the theoretical foundation for rejecting GOTO-heavy designs, highlighting how such practices led to maintenance challenges in increasingly complex software.
Edsger W. Dijkstra amplified these concerns in his seminal 1968 letter "Go To Statement Considered Harmful," arguing that the GOTO statement disrupted program readability and verifiability by allowing unpredictable transfers of control, thereby fostering the kind of tangled structures later dubbed spaghetti code. Published in Communications of the ACM, Dijkstra's critique resonated widely in academic circles and influenced industry practices during the mainframe era.
In the 1960s, batch-processing environments on systems like the IBM System/360 encouraged linear code organization, as programmers prioritized efficiency in resource-constrained settings over modular design, exacerbating the prevalence of jump-intensive programs. The term gained traction in both academic papers and industry reports critiquing mainframe software development, where hardware limitations and the absence of enforced modularity routinely produced difficult-to-debug applications.

Evolution in Modern Contexts

Despite the adoption of structured programming paradigms in the late 1970s and 1980s, spaghetti code has persisted in legacy systems, particularly in COBOL-based mainframe applications developed post-1980s, where decades of incremental modifications without refactoring have resulted in tangled control flows and architectural spaghetti. These systems often mix business logic, data access, and presentation code in unstructured ways, complicating maintenance and migration efforts. Similarly, rapid prototyping tools in the 1990s and early 2000s enabled quick iterations but frequently led to unstructured code accumulation, as developers prioritized functionality over modularity. In web scripting languages like early PHP, this manifested as procedural scripts embedding HTML, database queries, and logic without separation of concerns, turning dynamic web applications into modern equivalents of spaghetti code.
In object-oriented languages prevalent since the 1990s, spaghetti code has evolved through misuse of inheritance, known as "spaghetti inheritance," where deep hierarchies exceeding five levels or excessive multiple inheritance create convoluted class relationships that obscure method resolution and variable scoping. This anti-pattern arises when developers over-rely on inheritance for code reuse, leading to fragile dependency chains that hinder comprehension and evolution, even in languages like Java or C++ designed to promote encapsulation. In microservices architectures, adopted widely in the 2010s, distributed spaghetti emerges as an anti-pattern termed the "distributed monolith," where services share binary dependencies or duplicated schemas, resulting in tightly coupled tangles across networked components that undermine independent deployment and scalability. Another variant, "cloud native spaghetti," occurs when microservices appear decoupled but rely on shared codebases spread across repositories, causing cascading failures from minor changes.
From the 2000s to the 2020s, critiques of spaghetti code have intensified in agile environments, where iterative sprints and tight deadlines encourage incremental hacks and deferred refactoring, exacerbating code smells in rapidly evolving projects. Studies of open-source repositories, such as those in the OpenStack community, reveal that spaghetti code and related smells are frequently discussed in code reviews, often stemming from convention violations, though they are addressed promptly when flagged to prevent accumulation. In open-source Java projects, analyses show spaghetti code as one of the prevalent smells, contributing to code rot through persistent structural degradation over multiple versions. These discussions highlight how modern practices, while promoting velocity, can inadvertently sustain spaghetti-like tangles without rigorous review processes.

Related Metaphorical Terms

Ravioli Code

Ravioli code refers to a software structure composed of numerous small, self-contained modules or objects, analogous to individual pieces of ravioli, where each component is isolated and ideally loosely coupled but often results in difficulties when integrating them into a cohesive system. This approach contrasts with spaghetti code, the tangled extreme of unstructured programming, by emphasizing modularity at the potential expense of overall system intelligibility.
Key characteristics include excessive layers of abstraction that obscure data flow, minuscule functions with ambiguous or poorly documented interfaces, and a proliferation of components that complicates tracing execution paths and passing data between modules. Despite the clarity within each isolated unit, the lack of clear interconnections can lead to integration challenges, making maintenance arduous as developers struggle to understand emergent behaviors across the codebase.
The term originated in a 1992 letter to the editor by Raymond J. Rubey in Crosstalk: The Journal of Defense Software Engineering, where it was presented positively as an ideal counter to spaghetti code, promoting small, replaceable components in object-oriented design. It gained traction in the 2000s through software engineering discussions critiquing extreme modularity in object-oriented programming (OOP) and emerging microservices architectures, evolving into a cautionary metaphor for over-compartmentalization.

Lasagna Code

Lasagna code refers to a style of programming characterized by multiple horizontal layers of abstraction, akin to the sheets in lasagna, where each layer depends heavily on those above and below it, resulting in tight coupling that causes changes in one layer to propagate unpredictably throughout the system. This structure often emerges from attempts to impose order through layered designs, but excessive interdependence undermines modularity, making the codebase rigid and prone to unintended side effects during maintenance.
Key characteristics include monolithic architectures where business logic becomes buried beneath successive layers such as presentation (UI), service, and data access, creating redundant complexity without clear benefits. These layers, while ostensibly separable, frequently violate separation of concerns through shared state or direct calls across boundaries, leading to entangled subsystems that are difficult to test or extend in isolation. Such patterns are prevalent in legacy enterprise software developed during the boom of object-oriented frameworks in the late 1990s and early 2000s, where developers layered abstractions to address scalability but often over-engineered solutions.
The term lasagna code is used in software engineering discussions to describe excessive layering in object-oriented designs, as in the quote: "The object-oriented version of 'Spaghetti code' is, of course, 'Lasagna code'. (Too many layers)."Roberto Waltman. Unlike spaghetti code's unstructured tangles, lasagna code represents an excess of imposed structure that paradoxically hampers adaptability, as modifications require navigating and altering multiple interdependent strata. This results in higher long-term maintenance costs and reduced developer productivity in evolving systems.

Illustrative Examples

Classic Code Snippets

One classic illustration of spaghetti code appears in early BASIC programs from the 1970s, where developers often relied on GOTO statements to implement loops and conditional logic, leading to non-linear execution paths.
Consider this representative BASIC snippet for computing and printing squares of numbers from 1 to 100:
1 I = 0
2 I = I + 1
3 PRINT I; " squared = "; I * I
4 IF I >= 100 THEN GOTO 6
5 GOTO 2
6 PRINT "Program completed."
7 END
Here, the program jumps between lines 2 and 5 to form a loop, while line 4 introduces a conditional jump to exit, creating a tangled flow that skips sections erratically.
In FORTRAN, early numerical programs similarly employed line-numbered jumps with GOTO for conditional branches and iteration, often resulting in convoluted control structures.
A typical example is this FORTRAN 77 program to print powers of two up to 100, simulating a while loop via GOTO:
 INTEGER N
 N = 1
 10 IF (N .LE. 100) THEN
 WRITE (*,*) N
 N = 2 * N
 (/page/Goto)
 ENDIF
 END
The repeated jump back to label 10 from within the IF block enforces the loop, but integrating additional conditionssuch as error checks for overflowwould require more scattered labels and jumps, further obscuring the program's logic.
These snippets exemplify maintenance challenges inherent in spaghetti code: tracing execution requires mentally mapping jumps across distant lines, making debugging prone to errors and modifications risky, as altering one label could inadvertently disrupt unrelated paths without clear boundaries. Overuse of GOTO, a key identifying feature, amplifies this by enabling arbitrary jumps that defy sequential reading.

Real-World Case Studies

One prominent example of spaghetti code in legacy systems arose during the Y2K crisis, where vast COBOL codebases from the 1970s and 1980s, often featuring extensive use of GOTO statements and unstructured control flows, complicated remediation efforts for the date-handling issue. The Y2K bug stemmed from two-digit year representations assumed to be in the 1900s, potentially causing widespread system failures at the millennium transition. These tangled structures, often spanning millions of lines without modern modularization, amplified the risk of cascading errors in financial, governmental, and infrastructure applications, necessitating global remediation efforts estimated at $300600 billion.
These cases underscore the severe consequences of spaghetti code, as seen in the Therac-25 radiation therapy machine incidents from 19851987, where unstructured assembly code with tangled control flows and unsynchronized shared variables enabled race conditions, resulting in six massive radiation overdoses and three patient deaths due to unchecked high-energy beam delivery. The defects stemmed from jumps in the assembly code and complex phase-handling logic lacking proper synchronization, highlighting how such code structures in safety-critical systems can evade detection during inadequate testing, leading to extraordinarily high failure rates in operational use.

Causes and Impacts

Primary Causes

Spaghetti code often arises from human factors such as time pressures during prototyping and rapid development phases, where developers prioritize quick functionality over modular design to meet tight deadlines. Studies analyzing code repositories show that code smells indicative of spaghetti code, such as unstructured classes with long methods, are frequently introduced under high workload conditions, with 55-79% of such instances occurring when developers face elevated task volumes. Inexperienced developers contribute by skipping modularity in favor of simpler, ad-hoc solutions, leading to tangled control flows as they lack familiarity with structured programming principles. Additionally, "cowboy coding" practicescharacterized by unstructured, speed-focused development without planning or peer inputexacerbate this by encouraging haphazard implementations that accumulate complexity over time.
Technical triggers include limitations in early programming languages that promoted unstructured control flow. For instance, languages like BASIC relied heavily on GOTO statements, which allowed arbitrary jumps in execution, fostering convoluted paths difficult to trace and maintain. In contemporary settings as of 2025, AI-assisted coding tools, such as GitHub Copilot and similar generative AI, introduce new risks by enabling rapid code generation that often lacks structural integrity, resulting in inconsistent and inefficient implementations akin to "spaghetti code 2.0." Evolving requirements further drive patchwork additions, where new features are incrementally appended to existing codebases without refactoring, resulting in increasingly intertwined logic as systems grow.
Organizational issues, such as the absence of code reviews and standardized practices in small teams, permit poor coding habits to persist unchecked, allowing spaghetti code to emerge from uncoordinated contributions. In legacy maintenance scenarios, particularly in resource-constrained environments, new functionalities are often bolted onto outdated structures without redesign, perpetuating tangles as teams avoid the costs of overhaul. High-impact analyses confirm that these factors compound in projects lacking oversight, with most smells manifesting at initial code creation rather than through later modifications.

Consequences for Software Development

Spaghetti code significantly hampers technical aspects of software development by elevating defect rates, prolonging developer onboarding, and imposing scalability constraints. Empirical analysis of 39 production codebases revealed that low-quality code, characterized by high complexity and poor structure akin to spaghetti code, exhibits up to 15 times higher defect density compared to high-quality code, with an average of 3.70 defects per file versus 0.25. This increased proneness to bugs stems from the tangled control flows and opaque logic that make error detection and prevention challenging. Furthermore, complex code structures correlate moderately with reduced code understandability, particularly for early-career developers, leading to extended onboarding periods as new team members require more time to navigate and comprehend the codebase. In growing systems, spaghetti code limits scalability by entangling modules, which complicates the addition of features or users without risking widespread disruptions, as modifications in one area can inadvertently affect distant parts of the system. With the rise of AI-generated code, these technical challenges are amplified, as inconsistent AI outputs can accelerate the buildup of unmaintainable structures in large-scale projects.
Economically, spaghetti code drives up maintenance expenditures and delays feature delivery, straining project budgets and timelines. Industry estimates indicate that software maintenance accounts for up to 80% of the total lifecycle costs, a figure exacerbated by unstructured code that demands disproportionate effort for updates and fixes. Studies confirm that resolving issues in low-quality code consumes 124% more development time than in well-structured code, resulting in prolonged cycle times for feature releasesup to 9 times longer in the worst caseswhich can defer market opportunities and inflate operational expenses.
On the team level, spaghetti code erodes developer morale through persistent frustration from inefficient workflows and fosters higher turnover while accelerating technical debt buildup. Technical debt, including spaghetti-like structures, leads to significant time wastageup to 23% of development effortcausing stress and demotivation among developers who feel their progress is hindered by suboptimal code. This dissatisfaction contributes to elevated turnover rates, as developers seek environments with cleaner codebases to avoid the ongoing burden of navigating convoluted logic. Ultimately, such code perpetuates technical debt accumulation, as quick fixes to immediate issues further entangle the system, creating a cycle of escalating maintenance challenges and reduced team efficacy.

Mitigation Approaches

Refactoring Techniques

Refactoring spaghetti code involves systematically restructuring tangled, unstructured programs to enhance modularity, readability, and maintainability while preserving original behavior. This process typically proceeds incrementally to minimize risks, driven by the high maintenance costs associated with such code, which can increase comprehension effort by over 30% in affected modules. Common techniques focus on breaking down monolithic functions and replacing unstructured control flows with hierarchical, predictable alternatives.
One foundational step-by-step approach is extracting methods from long, complex functions to isolate logical units. This begins by identifying a coherent block of code within a lengthy methodsuch as a sequence of statements performing a single taskand encapsulating it into a new method with a descriptive name. Temporary variables are introduced if needed to clarify outputs, and the original method is updated to invoke the new one. For instance, loops or conditional blocks can be extracted to reduce cyclomatic complexity, as demonstrated in case studies where such decompositions lowered complexity scores from high values like 190 to more manageable levels. This technique directly addresses spaghetti code's hallmark of intertwined logic, promoting single-responsibility principles.
Replacing unstructured control elements, such as GOTO statements, with structured constructs forms another core strategy. Developers first map GOTO jumps to equivalent if-else chains, loops, or switch statements, ensuring no loss of flow semantics. In legacy Fortran code, for example, computed GOTOs are refactored into case constructs, while unconditional jumps are substituted with subprogram calls or direct returns. This aligns with structured programming theorems, eliminating arbitrary jumps that obscure execution paths. For intricate state-dependent logicoften manifesting as nested conditionalsintroducing design patterns like finite state machines provides a robust refactor. Here, states are explicitly modeled as classes or enums, with transitions handled via polymorphism or strategy patterns, replacing ad-hoc flags and conditionals with clear, verifiable behavior. Techniques such as Replace Conditional with Polymorphism facilitate this by deriving subclasses for each state, reducing conditional explosion.
Integrated development environments (IDEs) support these techniques through automated refactoring tools. Eclipse and IntelliJ IDEA offer built-in operations like Extract Method and Move Class, which apply changes across files while verifying syntax preservation. Visual Studio Code extends this with extensions for language-specific refactors, such as JavaScript or Python decompositions. Unit testing practices are essential, with tests written or enhanced before refactoring to establish a safety net, followed by regression runs post-change to confirm behavioral equivalence. The strangler fig pattern enables gradual migration of entire systems: new modular components incrementally intercept and replace legacy functionality, allowing the old code to wither without a full rewrite. This involves identifying "seams" like APIs or UI entry points to route traffic to fresh implementations.
As of 2025, artificial intelligence (AI) tools have emerged as powerful aids in refactoring spaghetti code, particularly for large legacy systems. Large language models such as OpenAI's GPT-4 and Anthropic's Claude can analyze thousands of lines of code, identify tangled structures, suggest modular decompositions, and even generate refactored versions while preserving functionality. These tools accelerate the process by automating initial assessments and proposing fixes for issues like excessive nesting or global dependencies, though human oversight remains crucial to ensure semantic accuracy.
Challenges in refactoring spaghetti code include preserving exact functionality amid semantic ambiguities and managing side effects from global variables or shared state. Automated tools often falter on context-dependent logic, requiring manual intervention and iterative testing to avoid introducing bugs. Global dependencies exacerbate this, as extracting methods may inadvertently alter shared data access, necessitating additional encapsulations like introducing parameters or facades. Immature tool support for undo operations further demands cautious, version-controlled increments.

Preventive Best Practices

Enforcing coding standards rooted in structured programming principles is essential to prevent spaghetti code from emerging during development. Structured programming, advocated by Edsger W. Dijkstra, emphasizes the avoidance of unstructured control flows like the GOTO statement, which can create tangled execution paths that hinder readability and maintenance. Instead, developers should rely on well-defined constructs such as loops, conditionals, and sequential execution to maintain clear program flow. Additionally, keeping functions or methods short promotes single-responsibility adherence, reducing the risk of overly complex routines that evolve into knots of interdependent logic; this guideline, drawn from clean code practices, ensures functions remain focused and testable. From the outset, adopting modular designdividing code into independent, reusable componentsfosters separation of concerns, countering tendencies toward monolithic structures often stemming from inexperience.
Integrating preventive processes into the development workflow further safeguards against spaghetti code. Code reviews, where peers scrutinize changes for structural integrity, significantly reduce defects and enhance maintainability by identifying potential tangles early. Pair programming, involving two developers collaborating in real-time, yields higher-quality code, particularly for complex tasks, by enabling immediate feedback and shared oversight that minimizes convoluted implementations. Incorporating continuous integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD) pipelines with static analysis tools, such as SonarQube, automates detection of code smells like excessive cyclomatic complexity, enforcing quality gates that block merges of problematic code before it accumulates.
Educational initiatives reinforce these practices by building foundational skills in clean code authoring. Training programs based on principles from Robert C. Martin's Clean Code emphasize readability, simplicity, and modularity, equipping developers to write maintainable code proactively. Selecting programming languages with built-in support for modularity, such as Python's modules and packages or Java's object-oriented classes and interfaces, inherently discourages unstructured coding by promoting encapsulation and abstraction from the start. These combined efforts cultivate habits that prioritize long-term code health over short-term expediency.

References

Web Applications Spaghetti Code for the 21st Century - IEEE Xplore

Fix spaghetti code and other pasta-theory antipatterns - TechTarget

Why Functional Programming Should Be the Future of Software ...

What is Spaghetti Code (And Why You Should Avoid It)

Spaghetti Code - GeeksforGeeks

Web Applications - Spaghetti Code for the 21st Century

Fundamental Program Forms

The Obscene Coupling Known as Spaghetti Code - ACM Queue

Reading, Writing, and Code - ACM Queue

Letters to the editor: go to statement considered harmful

Spaghetti Code - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

 18-642 Avoiding Spaghetti Code

 A Testing Methodology Using the Cyclomatic Complexity Metric

The Post-OOP Paradigm | American Scientist

(PDF) Migrating Legacy Systems to Service-Oriented Architectures

(PDF) ELEMENTS OF LEGACY PROGRAM COMPLEXITY

 A Tool for Testing of Inheritance Related Bugs in Object Oriented ...

Microservices Ending up as a Distributed Monolith - InfoQ

Seven Ways to Fail at Microservices - InfoQ

Code smells detection via modern code review - ACM Digital Library

A Systematic Literature Review on the Code Smells Datasets and ...

Spaghetti Code - GNU Project - Free Software Foundation

Ravioli Code - C2 wiki

Ravioli code - why an anti-pattern? - Stack Overflow

Chapter 3. Principles of software design - Microsoft .NET ...

 Programming Paradigms - - CERN Indico

To modernize from monolithic applications, the College Board ...

do-loops - Fortran 77 Tutorial

Use of Goto in Systems Code - Embedded in Academia

Spaces of Flaws of Flows: COBOL and the back-back-ends of ...

Lessons from the Millennium Bug

Why is the Apache HTTP Server so complex?

 An Investigation of the Therac-25 Accidents - Columbia CS

 The Business Impact of Code Quality A Quantitative Study of 39 ...

 Early Career Developers' Perceptions of Code Understandability. A ...

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5676841

The influence of Technical Debt on software developer morale

A large scale empirical study of the impact of Spaghetti Code and ...

None

Straightening Spaghetti-Code with Refactoring? - ResearchGate

Refactoring and the evolution of Fortran - ACM Digital Library

https://www.eclipse.org/

bliki: Strangler Fig

 Edgar Dijkstra: Go To Statement Considered Harmful - CWI

 The Robert C. Martin Clean Code Collection - Pearsoncmg.com

Comparative Programming Languages

The Effectiveness of Code Reviews on Improving Software Quality

The effectiveness of pair programming: A meta-analysis

Static Code Analysis Using SonarQube : A Step-by-Step Guide ...

 CSC519 Programming Languages - Computer Science
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion