Splunk Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 11 days ago 
Splunk
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Splunk is an American software company headquartered in San Jose, California, that develops a unified platform for searching, monitoring, analyzing, and visualizing machine-generated big data to support cybersecurity, IT operations, observability, and business analytics. Founded in 2003 by Michael Baum, Rob Das, and Erik Swan, the company initially focused on helping organizations manage the growing volume of log data from IT infrastructure, drawing inspiration from the concept of "spelunking" through data caves to uncover insights. Over the years, Splunk evolved into a leader in enterprise resilience, powering solutions for security operations (SecOps), IT operations (ITOps), and application performance management with AI-driven analytics.
The core of Splunk's offerings is the Splunk Platform, including Splunk Enterprise, which ingests and indexes data from diverse sources such as logs, metrics, traces, and network events to enable real-time monitoring, threat detection, and predictive intelligence. Key products also encompass Splunk Enterprise Security for advanced security information and event management (SIEM) with custom correlation searches that generate notable events for incident triage and analysis in dashboards such as Incident Review, Splunk IT Service Intelligence (ITSI) for operational analytics, and cloud-based services integrated with AI to reduce alert fatigue and accelerate incident response. By 2023, Splunk served thousands of enterprises worldwide, including many Fortune 100 companies, and was recognized as a leader in Gartner's Magic Quadrants for SIEM and application performance monitoring.
On March 18, 2024, Cisco Systems completed its acquisition of Splunk for approximately $28 billion, creating a combined entity that enhances visibility across networking, security, and observability to address digital disruptions and build resilience in hybrid environments. This merger positions Splunk's data analytics capabilities alongside Cisco's networking expertise, enabling organizations to prevent major issues, absorb shocks, and transform raw telemetry into actionable, AI-ready intelligence. As of February 2026, Splunk continues to operate as a Cisco company, with ongoing integration focused on AI-powered security, observability, and data insights. There are no indications of reversal or major changes to the acquisition status. As part of Cisco with approximately 86,000 employees, it continues to drive innovation in areas like agentic AI for security and automated observability, supporting a global customer base.

Overview

Company Profile

Splunk, Inc. was founded in 2003 in San Francisco, California, by Michael Baum, Rob Das, and Erik Swan, with the initial focus on indexing and analyzing machine-generated data. Following its acquisition by Cisco Systems, Inc., Splunk became a wholly-owned subsidiary on March 18, 2024, in a cash transaction valued at approximately $28 billion. Headquartered in San Francisco, the company now operates as a key component of Cisco's security and observability portfolio, leveraging its expertise in data analytics to support enterprise-scale operations worldwide.
As of early 2023, Splunk employed approximately 8,000 people globally. Following the acquisition, the workforce underwent adjustments as part of Cisco's integration efforts, including layoffs in 2024 and 2025. The organization is currently led by Kamal Hathi, who serves as Senior Vice President and General Manager for Splunk, overseeing the evolution of its unified security and observability platform within Cisco. In fiscal year 2023 (ending January 31, 2023), Splunk reported total revenue of $3.65 billion, reflecting steady growth in its cloud and subscription-based offerings prior to integration. Post-acquisition, Splunk's contributions have notably boosted Cisco's security segment; for example, in Q1 FY2026 (ended October 2025), security revenue reached $1.5 billion, up 18% year-over-year, with Splunk playing a key role.
Splunk maintains a strong market position as a leader in the 2025 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Security Information and Event Management (SIEM), where it was positioned highest in execution. It also earned leader status in the 2025 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Observability Platforms for the third consecutive year. Additionally, Splunk ranked number one in the 2025 Gartner Critical Capabilities for SIEM across all use cases, underscoring its robust capabilities in threat detection and operational intelligence. The company serves over 15,000 customers in more than 110 countries, including notable enterprises such as Singapore Airlines, which uses Splunk for service uptime and customer experience optimization, and Papa John's, which relies on it for security and digital order resilience.

Core Mission and Technology Focus

Splunk's core mission is to provide a "data-to-everything" platform that transforms machine-generated data into actionable insights, enabling organizations to search, monitor, and analyze logs, metrics, and other data sources to prevent disruptions, enhance security, and drive informed decision-making. This purpose aligns with building a safer and more resilient digital world by helping security, IT, and engineering teams maintain operational stability and proactively address challenges. At its foundation, Splunk emphasizes turning overwhelming volumes of machine datagenerated by applications, infrastructure, and devicesinto "doing," fostering enterprise resilience against digital shocks.
The technology focus centers on a unified platform that ingests data in real-time from diverse sources using agents and APIs, indexes it for rapid search and correlation using the Splunk Search Processing Language (SPL), a proprietary query language based on UNIX pipelines and SQL that enables powerful data manipulation and analysis, and delivers visualizations through intuitive web-style interfaces. This core engine supports scalable analysis of petabyte-scale machine data, integrating security and observability functions on a single architecture to streamline workflows across IT operations, cybersecurity, and business intelligence. By normalizing and enriching data formats, Splunk enables users to investigate anomalies, monitor performance, and generate insights without specialized silos.
Key concepts revolve around machine data as the linchpin for predictive actions, evolving from traditional log analysis to AI-ready intelligence through integrations like the Cisco Data Fabric, launched in 2025. This fabric connects knowledge, business, and machine data to power AI models for proactive resilience, allowing federated searches across hybrid environments.
In 2025, Splunk underscores enterprise resilience amid digital disruptions, positioning observability as a catalyst for AI adoption, improved customer experiences, and product innovation, as revealed in the State of Observability 2025 report based on a global study of 1,855 professionals. The report highlights how observability practices drive revenue growth and operational efficiency, with 88% of respondents noting positive business impacts in sectors like communications and manufacturing.

History

Founding and Early Years

Splunk was founded in 2003 by Michael Baum, Rob Das, and Erik Swan in San Francisco, California. The company was incorporated in the state of California in October 2003 under the name Splunk Inc. and reincorporated in Delaware in May 2006. The founders, drawing from their experiences in data management and technology, sought to develop a platform that could efficiently search, monitor, and analyze machine-generated data, particularly from IT systems and applications.
In its formative period, Splunk secured early venture capital to fuel development and growth. By the end of 2007, the company had raised approximately $40 million across multiple funding rounds from prominent investors, including August Capital, Ignition Partners, JK&B Capital, and Sevin Rosen Funds. This capital supported the creation and refinement of its core technology. The initial product, Splunk software, focused on log file analysis and real-time operational intelligence from machine data; its beta version was released in 2004, with general availability following in 2006.
By 2009, Splunk had achieved its first profitable quarter, signaling a shift toward financial sustainability amid rapid customer adoption in IT operations and security. This milestone came after years of investment in scaling the platform to handle vast volumes of unstructured data. In April 2012, Splunk marked a significant transition by completing its initial public offering on the NASDAQ stock exchange under the ticker symbol SPLK, raising approximately $229.5 million and valuing the company at over $1.5 billion. The IPO underscored the growing demand for Splunk's data analytics capabilities in enterprise environments.

Expansion and Key Acquisitions

Following its initial public offering in 2012, Splunk entered a period of rapid expansion from 2013 to 2021, marked by significant revenue growth and strategic investments in complementary technologies. In fiscal year 2013, ending January 31, 2013, the company reported revenue of $198.9 million, reflecting a 64% year-over-year increase driven by demand for its machine data analytics platform. By fiscal year 2021, ending January 31, 2021, revenue had surged to $2.23 billion, underscoring Splunk's scaling as a leader in operational intelligence despite ongoing investments in growth. This period also saw Splunk pivot toward cloud services, launching Splunk Cloud in general availability in October 2013 to enable machine data analysis in cloud environments without on-premises infrastructure.
A core driver of this expansion was a series of targeted acquisitions that enhanced Splunk's capabilities in analytics, security, and observability. In September 2013, Splunk acquired BugSense, a mobile analytics provider, to bolster operational intelligence for mobile device data. Later that year, in December 2013, it purchased Cloudmeter to integrate network data capture and monitoring into its platform for better application and infrastructure management. These early moves laid the groundwork for broader ecosystem integration.
Subsequent acquisitions deepened Splunk's expertise in security and IT operations. In June 2015, Splunk acquired Metafor, a data modeling firm specializing in machine learning and anomaly detection, to advance IT service intelligence and security information and event management (SIEM) offerings. Just a month later, in July 2015, it bought Caspida for $190 million, adding behavioral analytics to detect and respond to security threats more effectively. In 2018, Splunk accelerated its security and DevOps focus with the April acquisition of Phantom Cyber for $350 million, introducing security orchestration, automation, and response (SOAR) capabilities, followed by the June purchase of VictorOps for $120 million to support collaborative incident management in IT and development teams. The pinnacle came in October 2019 with the $1.05 billion acquisition of SignalFx, which brought real-time observability metrics for cloud-native applications and microservices, significantly expanding Splunk's reach in modern infrastructure monitoring.
Complementing these buys, Splunk launched a $150 million venture fund called Splunk Ventures in September 2019 to invest in innovative data startups, providing not only capital but also go-to-market support and technology access to foster ecosystem growth. This initiative, alongside the acquisitions, fueled market expansion in SIEMbolstered by Caspida's analytics for threat detectionand IT service intelligence, enhanced by Metafor's modeling for operational anomaly identification, positioning Splunk as a comprehensive platform for enterprise data challenges.

Leadership Transitions

In November 2021, Splunk underwent a significant leadership change when President and CEO Doug Merritt stepped down effective immediately after six years in the role. Graham Smith, the company's board chair, was appointed as interim CEO to ensure continuity during the search for a permanent successor. Merritt remained with Splunk in an advisory capacity to support the transition.
On March 2, 2022, Splunk announced the appointment of Gary Steele, former CEO of Proofpoint, as president and CEO, effective April 11, 2022, with Steele also joining the board of directors. This move brought extensive experience in cybersecurity and software leadership to Splunk, aligning with the company's evolving needs in data analytics and security.
In response to economic pressures in late 2023, Splunk implemented a workforce reduction of approximately 7%, affecting around 500 employees out of its roughly 8,000 global staff. The layoffs, announced on November 1, 2023, were part of broader cost-optimization efforts to streamline operations amid macroeconomic challenges.
Under Steele's leadership, Splunk intensified its strategic emphasis on cloud-native solutions and AI-driven innovations to address intensifying market competition and technological demands. This shift included enhanced investments in AI for security and observability, positioning the company to better serve enterprise customers navigating digital transformation.

Cisco Acquisition and Post-Acquisition Developments

On September 21, 2023, Cisco Systems announced its intent to acquire Splunk Inc. for approximately $28 billion in cash, marking Cisco's largest acquisition to date. The deal, unanimously approved by both companies' boards, was completed on March 18, 2024, after receiving regulatory approvals.
Following the acquisition's closure, Splunk retained its brand identity, existing management structure, and pricing model to ensure continuity for customers and partners. No significant operational disruptions were reported in the immediate aftermath, allowing Splunk to continue delivering its security and observability solutions seamlessly under Cisco's ownership.
Post-acquisition, Splunk's integration into Cisco's infrastructure emphasized AI-driven enhancements for the AI era, including the launch of Cisco IQ in November 2025, a unified AI-powered platform that leverages Splunk for observability and incident response. This integration contributed to substantial growth in Cisco's security segment, with revenue surging 117% year-over-year to $2.1 billion in the second quarter of fiscal year 2025, largely attributed to Splunk's contributions. At the Cisco Partner Summit in November 2025, executives reaffirmed Splunk's long-term role within Cisco, highlighting its centrality to future AI-native strategies.
In 2025, key advancements included announcements at Splunk .conf25 in September, where Cisco unveiled the Cisco Data Fabric, an architecture transforming machine-generated data into AI-ready intelligence through integration with Splunk's platforms. Additionally, Cisco completed its acquisition of SnapAttack in February 2025, enhancing Splunk's threat detection and response capabilities with advanced engineering tools.
These developments accelerated Splunk's platform expansion, supported targeted growth plans in the Asia-Pacific region, and reinforced a unified focus on security and observability to drive digital resilience.
As of February 2026, the acquisition remains in effect with Splunk operating as a Cisco company. Integration efforts continue to emphasize AI-powered security, observability, and data insights, with no indications of reversal or significant alterations to the acquisition structure.

Products and Services

Splunk Platform Fundamentals

The Splunk platform operates on a distributed architecture designed for ingesting, indexing, and analyzing machine-generated data. Splunk Enterprise features a highly scalable and reliable distributed architecture well-suited for enterprise networks. It supports horizontal scaling through indexer clustering, which provides data replication, redundancy, and automatic failover for high availability, and search head clustering, which ensures continuous search functionality. This design enables the platform to handle petabyte-scale data ingestion with real-time processing and supports validated architectures for stable deployments in large-scale environments. Once ingested, data is indexed into a searchable repository using a schema-on-read approach, where raw data is stored as events with timestamps and optional metadata extraction at search time.

Universal Forwarder

Data ingestion occurs primarily through universal forwarders, lightweight agents that collect logs and other data sources from endpoints and forward them to indexers without performing local parsing or indexing, or via APIs such as the HTTP Event Collector for direct streaming of events. Key components of the platform include Splunk Enterprise, the on-premises software that enables organizations to deploy and manage the full stack on their own infrastructure, and Splunk Cloud Platform, a fully managed SaaS offering that provides the same core capabilities without hardware provisioning. Both support ingestion and analysis of real-time streaming data alongside historical archives, encompassing diverse formats such as logs for event tracking, metrics for performance counters, and traces for distributed system debugging.

Types of Indexes

Splunk supports two primary types of indexes: standard event indexes, which store general log and event data in a flexible, unstructured or semi-structured format suitable for diverse data types, and metrics indexes, which are optimized specifically for storing and retrieving metrics data. Metrics indexes employ a highly structured format for numerical time-series data points, including timestamps, metric names, values, and dimensions, enabling lower storage usage (with events capped at 150 bytes) and significantly faster query performance compared to event indexes. They support specialized commands such as mstats, mpreview, and mcollect for efficient aggregation, previewing, and collection of metrics data.
Users can discover the list of fields used as metrics fields in a metrics index by employing the mcatalog command, which enumerates available metric names, dimensions, and their associated metadata. Additionally, fields available for use in WHERE clauses include index, metric_name, host, source, sourcetype, and custom dimensions.
The platform's indexing layer ensures data durability and accessibility across these types, with built-in retention policies to balance storage needs.

Search Processing Language (SPL)

Searching and analysis are powered by the proprietary Search Processing Language (SPL), a query language that chains commands with pipe operators to filter, transform, and aggregate data, supporting complex operations like statistical computations and machine learning functions. The Search Processing Language (SPL) is a powerful query language used within Splunk software to interact with and analyze data retrieved from indexes. It comprises a variety of search commands, along with their associated functions, arguments, and clauses, which instruct the software on how to process events. SPL enables users to filter unwanted information, extract additional data, evaluate new fields, calculate statistics, reorder results, and create visualizations such as charts. Key features of SPL include its ability to utilize functions and arguments to refine command behavior, such as formatting data for charts or specifying fields for evaluation. Some commands also employ clauses to group search results effectively. The language supports a range of capabilities, including data manipulation, statistical analysis, and the generation of reports, dashboards, and searches. For example, users can employ evaluation functions to assess data or statistical and charting functions to summarize and visualize it. SPL is integral to creating reports and dashboards by allowing users to define precise searches that can be saved and displayed visually. Its syntax is detailed in the Search Reference under "Understanding SPL syntax," with additional information on functions available in sections covering evaluation and statistical/charting functions. This flexibility makes SPL a core tool for data analysis within the Splunk ecosystem, enabling both simple queries and complex analytical tasks. Within SPL, the tstats command is often preferable to the stats command for performance-critical searches on large datasets, accelerated data models, and indexed fields. Unlike stats, which processes raw events, tstats queries precomputed summaries in tsidx files, resulting in faster execution, reduced CPU and memory usage, and greater efficiency in high-volume environments. Visualization is facilitated through interactive dashboards and scheduled reports, which render search results as charts, tables, and gauges for real-time monitoring and sharing insights.
The architecture scales horizontally to handle petabyte-scale datasets by distributing indexing across clusters of nodes, allowing seamless addition of resources for ingestion rates exceeding terabytes per day in large deployments. Splunk Enterprise has earned a 4.4 out of 5 rating on Gartner Peer Insights based on 1,020 user reviews, with reviewers frequently highlighting its scalability for complex infrastructures and long-term reliability. In 2019, Splunk Cloud Platform achieved FedRAMP Moderate authorization, enabling secure use by U.S. federal agencies for handling sensitive data under standardized security controls. In September 2024, Splunk Cloud Platform achieved FedRAMP High authorization.
General use cases for the platform fundamentals include IT operations for monitoring infrastructure health and alerting on anomalies, application performance management to trace bottlenecks in software stacks, and basic analytics to derive operational insights from aggregated logs and metrics.

Security and SIEM Solutions

Splunk Enterprise Security (ES) serves as a comprehensive security information and event management (SIEM) solution designed to facilitate threat detection, investigation, and compliance management across organizational environments. It aggregates and analyzes security data in real time from diverse sources, enabling security operations centers (SOCs) to identify and respond to threats efficiently while ensuring adherence to regulatory standards. A key component of Splunk ES is its integration of machine learning capabilities for anomaly detection, which identifies unusual patterns in data that may indicate potential security incidents beyond traditional rule-based alerts.
Central to Splunk ES's effectiveness is its native support for user and entity behavior analytics (UEBA), which employs machine learning algorithms to establish behavioral baselines for users, devices, and other entities, thereby detecting deviations that could signal insider threats, compromised accounts, or lateral movement by attackers. UEBA in Splunk ES provides risk scoring and contextual insights, allowing analysts to prioritize high-impact anomalies and reduce false positives through peer group analysis and dynamic profiling. Additionally, Splunk ES integrates with various threat intelligence feeds, enabling the enrichment of security events with external data from sources such as IBM X-Force, Intel 471, and others, which enhances correlation rules and improves overall threat visibility.
Splunk Enterprise Security supports custom detection rules implemented as correlation searches, which are scheduled searches that identify specific patterns in data and generate notable events when conditions are met, indicating potential security incidents. These notable events are displayed and managed in built-in dashboards, including the Incident Review dashboard for triaging and investigating notable events, the Security Posture dashboard for providing a high-level overview of detections and urgency levels, and the Risk Analysis dashboard for monitoring risk scoring and changes. Users can create custom correlation searches manually, by cloning existing ones, or via a guided wizard for supported search types. Users can also customize existing dashboardsfor example, by editing key indicators, urgency levels, and statusesor build new dashboards to visualize detection analytics.
Complementing Splunk ES, Splunk Security Orchestration, Automation, and Response (SOAR) automates incident response workflows by orchestrating actions across integrated security tools, reducing manual intervention and accelerating remediation times. It features a visual playbook editor for creating customizable automation sequences aligned with frameworks like MITRE ATT&CK, supporting over 300 integrations for tasks such as alert triage and evidence collection. The free Splunk SOAR community edition is available for non-commercial use, limited to 100 actions per day, providing an entry point for smaller teams to explore its capabilities.
In 2025, Splunk was recognized as a Leader in the Gartner Magic Quadrant for Security Information and Event Management for the eleventh consecutive year, positioned highest in execution due to its robust threat detection and response features. The company's State of Security 2025 report further highlights the role of unified SIEM and SOAR solutions in SOC transformations, emphasizing AI-driven efficiencies to combat alert fatigue and data silos in modern cybersecurity operations.

Observability and IT Operations

Splunk IT Service Intelligence (ITSI) is a machine learning-powered application that correlates metrics, events, logs, and traces to monitor the health of IT services and predict potential incidents before they impact users. It enables IT operations teams to define key performance indicators (KPIs) and service-level agreements (SLAs), providing real-time visibility into service performance and dependencies across hybrid environments. By applying predictive analytics, ITSI identifies anomalies and root causes, reducing mean time to resolution through automated alerting and glass-table visualizations that map service interrelationships.
Splunk Observability Cloud offers full-stack observability by unifying monitoring of infrastructure, applications, and logs in a single platform, originally enhanced through the 2019 acquisition of SignalFx for $1.05 billion. This solution supports IT operations with AI-driven alerting that uses machine learning to detect issues and provide troubleshooting guidance without data sampling, synthetic monitoring to proactively test user journeys and API performance, and dynamic service maps that visualize dependencies and correlate metrics with business outcomes. In July 2025, updates introduced an enhanced data management overview for easier integration of new telemetry sources, while September 2025 enhancements added call graph profiling for hybrid application performance optimization and enriched alert variables for synthetic monitoring to improve context in notifications. October 2025 updates included endpoint grouping rules and business transaction monitoring in APM, entity-index mappings for log optimization, introduction of database monitoring, and GCP multi-account integration. November 2025 enhancements featured built-in navigators and dashboards for AWS, Azure, Redis, and Kubernetes, improved logs UI, on-demand synthetic tests, SSL/TLS certificate monitoring, and observability for AI applications.
Organizations leveraging these observability tools report significant business benefits, including a 53% higher return on investment compared to peers, with 65% noting positive revenue impacts from insights that elevate customer experiences and foster product innovation. For instance, advanced observability practices enable teams to achieve nearly twice the likelihood of substantial improvements in employee productivity and revenue generation by uncovering actionable telemetry data. These capabilities support IT operations in maintaining digital resilience, allowing businesses to scale reliably while prioritizing user-centric outcomes.

Cloud and AI-Enhanced Offerings

Splunk's transition to cloud services began with the launch of Splunk Cloud in general availability on October 1, 2013, enabling organizations to access core Splunk Enterprise functionalities such as application management, digital intelligence, and IT operations directly in the cloud without on-premises infrastructure. This shift facilitated scalable machine data analysis for cloud-native environments. Over time, Splunk deepened its cloud integrations, partnering with Amazon Web Services (AWS) to provide real-time visibility into AWS services for troubleshooting, security, and compliance monitoring. Similarly, collaborations with Google Cloud enhanced data ingestion from Google Cloud Platform (GCP) sources, including billing data, resource metadata, and Google Cloud Storage, through dedicated add-ons that support metrics and logs collection. In 2019, Splunk advanced its cloud capabilities with the introduction of Data Fabric Search for federated querying across multiple Splunk deployments and third-party data stores, alongside the Data Stream Processor for real-time data collection, transformation, and routing at scale.
Building on this foundation, Splunk integrated artificial intelligence (AI) to deliver predictive insights and simplify user interactions with machine data. Splunk AI leverages generative AI models to enable natural language querying, allowing users to generate, explain, and translate Splunk Search Processing Language (SPL) queries from plain English prompts, thereby accelerating analytics without requiring deep coding expertise. These features support predictive analytics in areas like IT service intelligence, where AI identifies anomalies and forecasts issues based on historical patterns. At .conf25 in September 2025, Splunk announced AI-enhanced capabilities for security and operations, including agentic AI agents that automate threat response and transform machine data into actionable intelligence for digital resilience. This included integrations like the Cisco Data Fabric, which unifies data management to fuel AI-driven operations across hybrid environments.
In 2025, Splunk's State of Observability report highlighted observability as a key catalyst for AI adoption, with 78% of organizations reporting that AI integration via observability tools freed up time for innovation and boosted productivity for nearly three-quarters of respondents. The Splunk Predictions 2025 report further emphasized AI's role in addressing digital resilience challenges, such as enhancing compliance amid evolving regulations and mitigating talent shortages in cybersecurity through student-powered security operations centers in the public sector. Platform updates in 2025 streamlined Splunk's offerings with a stronger emphasis on AI and cybersecurity, introducing agentic AI for unified threat detection that reduces alert fatigue and investigation times. To maintain security, Splunk issued advisories in July 2025 addressing vulnerabilities in products like Splunk Enterprise and Universal Forwarder, including third-party package updates for issues such as improper access control and denial-of-service risks. In November 2025, Splunk issued additional advisories, including SVD-2025-1103 for third-party package updates in Splunk Enterprise.

Ecosystem and Community

Splunkbase and App Marketplace

Splunkbase serves as the official marketplace for Splunk apps, add-ons, and integrations, enabling users to extend the functionality of the Splunk platform through community-driven and partner-developed content. Launched in the mid-2000s as a repository for custom extensions, it has grown significantly, hosting over 1,000 apps and add-ons as of 2025 to support diverse data ingestion, analysis, and visualization needs.
The platform features a variety of content types, including full apps that provide dashboards, reports, and workflows for specific technologies, as well as add-ons focused on data collection from sources like cloud services or monitoring tools. For instance, the Splunk Add-on for Amazon Web Services (AWS) allows administrators to gather configuration snapshots, changes, and metrics from AWS services, while the Splunk Add-on for New Relic enables integration with New Relic's APM and Insights platforms for performance data. Much of this content stems from community contributions, alongside offerings from Splunk and certified partners, ensuring compatibility with the Common Information Model (CIM) for normalized data across apps.
Users leverage Splunkbase to customize deployments for key areas such as security monitoring, observability, and industry-specific applications, with options for both free downloads and premium content available for purchase. This flexibility allows organizations to tailor Splunk for use cases like threat detection or IT operations without building everything from scratch, enhancing scalability and efficiency.
When customizing apps from Splunkbase that include dashboards, users can configure the app to land on a desired dashboard as the default view instead of the search page. This is accomplished by creating or editing the nav/default.xml file in the app's local or default directory (data/ui/nav/default.xml).
Example content for default.xml to set a dashboard as default:
<nav search_view="search">
 <view name="your_dashboard_name" default='true' />
 <view name="search" />
 <!-- Add other menu items as needed -->
</nav>
Replace "your_dashboard_name" with the actual name (ID) of the saved dashboard. After updating the file, reload the app (Settings > Reload objects) or restart Splunk for changes to take effect. This overrides the default behavior of landing on search when no specific view is specified, improving user experience with direct access to the app's primary dashboard.
By providing developer guidelines on packaging, naming conventions, and submission standards, Splunkbase fosters ecosystem growth, encouraging contributions that promote innovation and interoperability within the Splunk community. Developers benefit from resources like a free 10GB development license and detailed approval criteria, which ensure high-quality, secure content distribution. In October 2025, Splunk Cloud Platform 10.1.2507 was released, enhancing developer tools for AI integrations.

Developer Tools and Integrations

Splunk provides a suite of software development kits (SDKs) to enable developers to interact programmatically with the platform, including the Splunk SDK for Python, which serves as a wrapper around the REST API to simplify tasks like authentication, searching, and data manipulation. The SDK for Java similarly facilitates building applications that target the Splunk engine via REST endpoints, supporting operations such as job management and configuration updates. Additional SDKs exist for JavaScript and a deprecated version for C#, offering language-specific tools for web and .NET integrations.
The core of these tools is the Splunk Enterprise REST API, which exposes HTTP methods (GET, POST, DELETE) for accessing searches, indexes, and administrative functions, allowing developers to extend Splunk's capabilities without direct platform modifications. For data ingestion, Splunk Connect refers to a family of connectors, such as Splunk Connect for Kafka, which streams data from Kafka topics to the Splunk HTTP Event Collector (HEC), and Splunk Connect for Syslog, designed for scalable syslog ingestion. These tools support efficient, real-time data forwarding in diverse environments.
Integrations are facilitated through pre-built connectors for major cloud providers, including AWS and Azure, enabling seamless telemetry collection from services like AWS Lambda and Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS). For databases, Splunk DB Connect provides SQL-based access to relational systems such as MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, and DB2, allowing bidirectional data exchange for queries and reports. Kubernetes support is handled via Splunk Connect for Kubernetes, which uses Helm charts to import logs, metrics, and objects from clusters into Splunk for monitoring. These connectors emphasize hybrid environments, combining on-premises and cloud resources, with 2025 updates enhancing hybrid application monitoring for better visibility across distributed systems.
Developers access comprehensive resources through the Splunk Developer Program, including detailed documentation on dev.splunk.com for SDK usage, API references, and integration guides, alongside tutorials for building custom apps and add-ons. The annual .conf conference features dedicated developer tracks, with .conf25 in September 2025 offering sessions on app development, AI integrations, and hybrid setups. Splunk supports AI and machine learning model integrations via the Machine Learning Toolkit (MLTK), which includes Search Processing Language (SPL) commands for building, testing, and deploying supervised and unsupervised models directly within searches. In 2025, previews of enhanced synthetics testing provide additional context for alerts in hybrid monitoring scenarios, improving proactive issue detection.

Partnerships and Sponsorships

Strategic Corporate Alliances

Following Cisco's acquisition of Splunk in March 2024, the companies have pursued synergies that integrate Splunk's observability and security capabilities with Cisco's networking and AI infrastructure, enabling unified offerings for real-time threat detection and data-driven insights. This collaboration has boosted Cisco's security revenues by 9% in Q4 FY2025, driven by combined solutions that enhance comprehensive threat protection across hybrid environments. At the Cisco Partner Summit 2025, held in November, leaders emphasized the role of Splunk in building end-to-end AI infrastructure, urging partners to develop specialized Splunk practices for data-centric security and observability.
Beyond Cisco, Splunk maintains strategic alliances with major cloud providers to support hybrid and multi-cloud deployments. The partnership with Google Cloud focuses on delivering real-time visibility and digital resilience, allowing organizations to analyze data across environments for faster decision-making. Similarly, collaboration with AWS enables seamless migrations, observability, and security in hybrid setups, powering AI readiness by unifying data from on-premises and cloud sources. These integrations facilitate flexible, scalable solutions without vendor lock-in, as evidenced by Splunk's support for SmartStore across AWS, Google Cloud Platform, and Azure.
In 2019, Splunk launched Splunk Ventures, a $150 million fund comprising a $100 million Innovation Fund and a $50 million Social Impact Fund, to invest in data-driven startups that enhance analytics and security ecosystems. The fund's initial investment was in Kavach, a cloud-native application security firm, with subsequent backing for companies like Mesh7 in network management software, fostering co-innovation in areas such as AI observability. This initiative positions Splunk as a strategic investor, providing portfolio companies with technical integrations and market access to accelerate growth.
Joint initiatives with partners emphasize co-development for observability in the AI era, including agentic AI features in Splunk Observability Cloud that enable self-healing IT systems and proactive issue resolution. For instance, integrations with Cisco's platform unify security analytics and AI operations, transforming disparate tools into a cohesive data fabric for enhanced reliability. In APAC, Splunk has reaffirmed expansion plans through regional partnerships, such as a 2025 collaboration with the Australian Signals Directorate to integrate Splunk Enterprise Security with national cyber threat intelligence sharing. Additional efforts with AWS target AI infrastructure readiness in the region, addressing data chaos in hybrid clouds.
These alliances deliver benefits like improved data fabric resilience and operational efficiency, with observability insights boosting employee productivity for 74% of organizations and guiding AI adoption for customer experience enhancements. By leveraging ecosystem collaborations, Splunk enables partners to scale solutions that mitigate risks in AI-driven environments while driving innovation.

Sports and Event Sponsorships

Splunk has engaged in strategic sports sponsorships to highlight its data analytics capabilities in dynamic, high-performance environments, while enhancing brand visibility through prominent placements on team assets. These initiatives underscore the company's commitment to applying its platform in real-time, data-intensive scenarios beyond traditional IT operations.
In 2020, Splunk entered a multi-year partnership with McLaren Racing, the Formula One team, serving as an official technology partner to optimize performance through advanced data analysis. The collaboration deploys Splunk's Data-to-Everything Platform to process telemetry and operational data from races, enabling real-time insights for engineers and teams to enhance agility and decision-making on the track. As part of the deal, Splunk's logo appeared on the sidepods and cockpit surrounds of the McLaren MCL35 car during the 2020 season, providing global exposure during high-profile events. The partnership was extended in 2021 and remains active as of 2025, supporting McLaren's Formula 1 and esports efforts with unified security and observability tools.
Similarly, Splunk initiated a global sponsorship with the Lidl-Trek (formerly Trek-Segafredo) professional cycling teamsboth men's and women'sin 2019, marking the first such sponsorship for the women's squad in Trek's history. The agreement integrates Splunk's analytics to examine data from training, manufacturing, and racing operations, delivering actionable insights "from factory floor to finish line" for riders, coaches, and mechanics to improve performance and efficiency. Branding elements include Splunk's logo on team jerseys, bikes, vehicles, and race hospitality setups, offering visibility across UCI WorldTour events. The partnership began in 2019 with no publicly announced end date.
These sponsorships serve to demonstrate Splunk's practical applications in high-stakes, data-driven settings, where rapid analysis of vast datasets directly influences competitive outcomes and operational resilience.
Beyond motorsports and cycling, Splunk hosts and participates in major events like its annual .conf user conference, which facilitates product announcements and community engagement. For instance, .conf25 occurred from September 8 to 11, 2025, at the Menino Convention & Exhibition Center in Boston, Massachusetts, featuring keynotes on AI-enhanced offerings and data value maximization.

References

About Splunk | What is Splunk?

What is Splunk? Key Benefits and Features of Splunk - Fortinet

What Is Splunk? The Complete Overview of What Splunk Does

About Splunk Enterprise | Splunk Docs

Splunk Enterprise Security

A New Day for Data: Cisco and Splunk

Splunk | The Key to Enterprise Resilience

Cisco Completes Acquisition of Splunk

Leadership | Splunk

Splunk Announces Fiscal Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2023 ...

Splunk Raised Cisco Security Revenue in Latest Quarter

2025 Gartner Magic Quadrant for SIEM - Splunk

Splunk Named a Leader in the 2025 Gartner Magic Quadrant for ...

Splunk Ranked Number 1 in the 2025 Gartner Critical Capabilities ...

Customers | Splunk

Singapore Airlines | Customer Success - Splunk

Papa Johns | Customer Success - Splunk

The Splunk Data-to-Everything Platform Brings Speed and Scale to ...

Why Work Here | Splunk

The Splunk Platform

 Using Splunk for CDM and CMaaS

Cisco Data Fabric Transforms Machine Data into AI-Ready Intelligence

Powering AI Innovation with Splunk: Meet the Cisco Data Fabric

Splunk Report Shows Observability is a Business Catalyst for AI ...

The State of Observability in Communications and Media in 2025

splunk inc. - SEC.gov

Splunk 2025 Company Profile: Valuation, Investors, Acquisition

https://tracxn.com/d/companies/splunk/__puqiqnvz30T0eAvlcnU6-WIDJHNb9jclyNuFryW0dqU

Splunk Surges After Pricing Above Range in Web Data IPO

splunk inc. - SEC.gov

Splunk Inc. Announces Fiscal Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2021 ...

Splunk Announces the General Availability of Splunk Cloud

Splunk Acquisitions

Splunk Buys Security Startup Caspida For $190M - TechCrunch

Splunk Acquires SignalFx For $1.05B, Just Two Months After ...

Splunk Launches Splunk Ventures and a Dedicated Social-Impact ...

Splunk Announces CEO Transition

Splunk Announces CEO Transition - Business Wire

Graham Smith, Splunk's Chair, Named Interim CEO - SEC.gov

Splunk Names Gary Steele Chief Executive Officer

Splunk hires Gary Steele from Proofpoint as its new CEO

Splunk to lay off nearly 7% of its workforce amid economic woes

Splunk - SEC.gov

AI Innovations Unveiled By Splunk Bolstering Security, CX & Visibility

Cisco and Splunk Strengthen Enterprise Digital Resilience in the AI ...

Cisco to buy cybersecurity firm Splunk for $28 billion - Reuters

Cisco to Acquire Splunk, to Help Make Organizations More Secure ...

Cisco Systems Completes Its $28 Billion Purchase of Splunk

Investor Relations - Cisco Completes Acquisition of Splunk

8-K - SEC.gov

Cisco Acquired Splunk: What Changes? | Hurricane Labs MSSP

https://newsroom.cisco.com/c/r/newsroom/en/us/a/y2025/m11/cisco-launches-cisco-iq-the-unified-ai-powered-experience-that-connects-the-entire-customer-journey.html

https://newsroom.cisco.com/c/r/newsroom/en/us/a/y2025/m11/at-partner-summit-cisco-highlights-a-massive-ai-opportunity.html

Cisco Pops On Earnings, But Is It Sustainable? - Futuriom

https://futurumgroup.com/insights/cisco-partner-summit-2025-does-cisco-have-the-right-end-to-end-ai-story/

Splunk .conf25: Day 1 Keynote - Cisco Newsroom

Cisco completes SnapAttack acquisition

Cisco's SnapAttack Deal Expands Splunk's Capabilities

Cisco on Splunk's future: We're in for the long haul | Frontier Enterprise

Splunk .conf25: Cisco, AI, And Data - Forrester

Splunk Enterprise Security Features

Machine Learning in Splunk Enterprise Security: Unleashing Hidden ...

User and Entity Behavior Analytics (UEBA) - Splunk

Strengthen SOC Defenses with Native UEBA in Splunk Enterprise ...

Threat intelligence sources - Splunk Documentation

Splunk Security Orchestration, Automation and Response (SOAR)

Splunk SOAR Features

Obtain and configure a Splunk SOAR (On-premises) license

Splunk is a Leader and Placed Highest in Execution in the Gartner ...

Enter the SOC of the Future in Splunk's State of Security 2025

Splunk IT Service Intelligence

About Splunk IT Service Intelligence

Splunk IT Service Intelligence Product Brief

Splunk Observability Cloud

July 22, 2025 release - Splunk Docs

September 2025 - Splunk Docs

State of Observability 2025 Reveals Why Business Growth ... - Splunk

Download now: State of Observability 2025 - Splunk

Splunk Report Shows Observability is a Business Catalyst for AI ...

Splunk Announces the General Availability of Splunk Cloud - Yahoo

AWS and Splunk

Splunk and Google Cloud

Splunk offers expanded data access and real-time stream processing

Splunk AI Assistant for SPL

A Recap of .conf25 Splunk Observability Announcements

The Partner Advantage: Splunk .conf25 Unveils the Future of AI ...

Splunk Predictions 2025

Cisco Elevates the SOC with Agentic AI for Faster Threat Response ...

SVD-2025-0711 | Splunk Vulnerability Disclosure

Apps - Splunkbase

Publish apps to Splunkbase | Documentation - Splunk Dev

Splunk Add-on for Amazon Web Services (AWS) - Splunkbase

Splunk Add-on for New Relic - Splunkbase

Review your apps and add-ons | Splunk Docs

What are Splunk Apps and Add-Ons

File standards | Documentation | Splunk Developer Program

Naming conventions for apps and add-ons in Splunkbase

Develop - Splunkbase

Integrate the Splunk platform using development tools for Python

Splunk Enterprise SDK for Java | Documentation

Developer tools for Splunk Cloud Platform or Splunk Enterprise

API Reference | Splunk Developer Program

Splunk Connect for Kafka - Splunkbase

Understanding best practices for Splunk Connect for Syslog

How Splunk DB Connect works

splunk/splunk-connect-for-kubernetes: Helm charts associated with ...

Building the Future: Splunk Developer Sessions You Can't Miss at ...

AI Toolkit | Splunk

What's New in Splunk Observability September 2025

A New Day for Data: Cisco and Splunk

Cisco Security Revenues Surge 9% in Q4 FY2025 with Splunk and ...

Google Cloud | Partners - Splunk

Embracing a Hybrid and Multi-cloud World - Splunk

Splunk Launches $150M Splunk Ventures - FinSMEs

Splunk Introduces New Data-to-Everything Pricing and $150M ...

Splunk Ventures Innovation Fund: Performance | PitchBook

Splunk's Venture Arm to Invest $150M in Data-Driven Startups

Cisco Supercharges Observability with Agentic AI for Real ... - Splunk

Cisco and Splunk: Redefining Security, Observability, and AI ...

Cisco Announces Splunk and Australian Signals Directorate Joining ...

From Data Chaos to Clarity: Splunk and AWS Power AI Readiness ...

Splunk Partners Seeing More Opportunities, Channel Resources ...

McLaren Partnership | Splunk

McLaren Racing and Splunk Announce Multi-Year Formula 1 ...

F1 2025: List of partners/sponsors for each of 10 teams

Trek-Segafredo partners with Splunk

Splunk signs sponsorship deal to provide Trek-Segafredo cycling ...

.conf25 User Conference | Splunk

About the search language | Splunk Docs

Splexicon:SPL - Splunk Documentation

Overview of metrics | Splunk Docs

Overview of metrics | Splunk Docs

mcatalog command | Splunk Docs

The tstats command

Gartner Peer Insights: Splunk Enterprise Reviews

Splunk Documentation: Indexer Clusters

Splunk Documentation: Search Head Clusters

Splexicon:Correlationsearch

Splexicon:Correlationsearch - Splunk Documentation

Incident Review dashboard - Splunk Enterprise Security Documentation

Cisco Completes Acquisition of Splunk

Cisco acquires Splunk

Splunk Report: Agentic AI Takes Center Stage in CISOs Path to Digital Resilience

Splunk Accelerates Agentic AI Innovation at Cisco Live Amsterdam

Configure app navigation - Splunk Documentation
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion