String Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
String
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 String theory is a theoretical framework in particle physics that posits the fundamental constituents of the universe as tiny, one-dimensional vibrating strings rather than zero-dimensional point particles, with different vibrational modes corresponding to various elementary particles and forces. These strings are hypothesized to exist at the Planck scale, approximately 10^{-35} meters, where quantum gravity effects become significant. The theory emerged in the late 1960s as an attempt to model the strong nuclear force via the Veneziano amplitude but evolved into a candidate for a unified theory of quantum mechanics and general relativity by incorporating supersymmetry in superstring formulations.
Key mathematical advancements include the 1984 anomaly cancellation in ten-dimensional superstring theory by Green and Schwarz, enabling consistent quantum gravity descriptions without infinities, and the 1995 second superstring revolution leading to M-theory, which unifies the five perturbative superstring theories via dualities and an eleventh dimension. These developments resolved anomalies in bosonic string theory, which required 26 dimensions and lacked fermions, and provided tools like AdS/CFT correspondence for studying strongly coupled systems. However, string theory's requirement for extra compactified dimensions and its prediction of a vast "landscape" of approximately 10^{500} possible vacua have hindered derivation of unique, testable low-energy predictions matching observed physics.
Despite generating significant mathematical insights applicable beyond physics, such as in enumerative geometry, string theory remains empirically unconfirmed, with critics arguing its flexibility allows accommodation of data without falsifiability, potentially stalling progress in quantum gravity alternatives. No direct experimental evidence, such as supersymmetric particles at accessible energies, has emerged from accelerators like the LHC, underscoring ongoing debates about its scientific status versus mathematical conjecture.

Mathematics

Strings as Finite Sequences

In mathematics, particularly within combinatorics on words and formal language theory, a string is defined as a finite sequence of symbols drawn from a finite set known as an alphabet \Sigma. The alphabet \Sigma consists of distinct symbols, such as {0,1}\{0,1\}{0,1} for binary strings or {a,b,c}\{a,b,c\}{a,b,c} for ternary ones, and strings are formed by ordering these symbols without repetition of positions. This conceptualization treats strings as ordered tuples, emphasizing their sequential nature rather than multisets, which aligns with their role in modeling discrete structures like words or codes.
The empty string, denoted \epsilon or \lambda, is the unique string of length zero, serving as the identity element under concatenation. The length of a string www, denoted w|w|w, is the number of symbols it contains; for instance, abc=3|abc| = 3abc=3 over ={a,b,c}\Sigma = \{a,b,c\}={a,b,c}. Concatenation of two strings uuu and vvv, written uvuvuv or uvu \cdot vuv, produces a new string by appending vvv to uuu, preserving order and yielding a sequence of length u+v|u| + |v|u+v. This operation is associative but not commutative, as abbaab \neq baab=ba in general, reflecting the causal ordering inherent in sequences.
Further properties include prefixes, suffixes, and substrings: a prefix of www is an initial segment, a suffix a terminal segment, and a substring any contiguous segment. The reversal of www, denoted wRw^RwR, inverts the order of symbols, useful in analyzing palindromes or symmetries. The set of all finite strings over \Sigma, including \epsilon, forms \Sigma^*, which is countably infinite and closed under concatenation, enabling inductive constructions and proofs about string properties via structural recursion. These elements underpin theorems on string avoidance, repetition thresholds, and growth rates, such as the fact that binary strings of length nnn number exactly 2n2^n2n.

Strings in Formal Language Theory

In formal language theory, a string is a finite sequence of symbols drawn from a finite nonempty set known as the alphabet . The empty string, denoted , is the unique string of length zero, and the set of all possible finite strings over , including , forms the Kleene closure *. A formal language L over is defined as any subset of *, which may be finite, countably infinite, or empty.
Fundamental operations on strings include concatenation, where for strings $ w_1 $ and $ w_2 $, the string $ w_1 w_2 $ (or $ w_1 \cdot w_2 $) appends $ w_2 $ to $ w_1 $; the length function $ |w| $, counting the number of symbols in $ w $; and exponentiation $ w^n $, yielding the concatenation of $ n $ copies of $ w $ for nonnegative integer $ n $, with $ w^0 = \varepsilon $. Additional operations encompass reversal $ w^R $, which inverts the order of symbols in $ w $; prefix and suffix extraction, where a prefix of $ w $ is an initial substring and a suffix is a terminal substring; and substring identification, referring to any contiguous subsequence. These operations are closed under * and underpin recursive constructions, such as the Kleene star $ L^* = \bigcup_{n=0}^\infty L^n $ for a language L, generating all finite concatenations of strings from L.
Strings serve as the atomic units for language recognition and generation in automata and grammars. An automaton, such as a deterministic finite automaton (DFA), processes an input string symbol by symbol via state transitions, accepting the string if it reaches an accepting state upon exhaustion of the input. In generative models, context-free grammars derive strings through productions replacing nonterminals, enabling hierarchical structures like balanced parentheses, while the Chomsky hierarchy classifies languages by the string constraints enforceable: type-3 (regular) languages admit finite-state recognition of local patterns; type-2 (context-free) allow stack-based parsing for nested dependencies; type-1 (context-sensitive) impose length-bounded contexts; and type-0 (recursively enumerable) permit unrestricted Turing machine acceptance. This hierarchy, formalized by Noam Chomsky in 1956, delineates computational complexity via string manipulation capabilities, with decidability and closure properties under operations like union and concatenation varying across levels.
For example, over alphabet = {a, b}, strings include , a, b, aa, ab, ba, bb, aaa, and so on, forming * as a countably infinite set; the language of all strings with equal numbers of a's and b's is context-free but not regular.
Example derivation in a (/page/Context-free_grammar) for even-length palindromes:
S | a S a | b S b
Derives strings like "(/page/ABBA)": S a S a a b S b a a b b a = abba
Such derivations highlight strings' role in modeling syntactic validity, with automata providing equivalent recognizers for each hierarchy level up to type-2.

Physics

Classical Theory of Vibrating Strings

The classical theory of vibrating strings models the small-amplitude transverse oscillations of a uniform, flexible string under constant tension, neglecting effects such as stiffness, damping, or longitudinal motion. The string is assumed to have linear mass density and tension T, fixed at endpoints x=0 and x=L, with displacement u(x,t) satisfying the one-dimensional wave equation u/t = c u/x, where c = (T/) is the wave speed./09:_Partial_Differential_Equations/9.02:_Derivation_of_the_Wave_Equation) This equation arises from applying Newton's second law to a small string element, balancing the net transverse force from tension components against the element's mass times acceleration, under the small-angle approximation where sin tan ./09:_Partial_Differential_Equations/9.02:_Derivation_of_the_Wave_Equation)
For an infinite string, the general solution is d'Alembert's formula u(x,t) = /2 + (1/(2c)) _{x-ct}^{x+ct} g(s) ds, where f(x) is the initial displacement and g(x) the initial velocity; this represents superposition of right- and left-propagating waves. For a finite string with fixed ends, boundary conditions u(0,t)=u(L,t)=0 lead to periodic extensions of initial data in d'Alembert's method or, equivalently, separation of variables yielding normal modes u_n(x,t) = sin(nx/L) , with angular frequencies _n = nc/L (n=1,2,...), determined by initial conditions via Fourier sine series coefficients A_n = (2/L) _0^L f(x) sin(nx/L) dx and B_n = (2/(nc)) _0^L g(x) sin(nx/L) dx. These modes explain harmonic overtones in string instruments, with fundamental frequency f_1 = c/(2L) and higher harmonics at integer multiples.
The theory originated in the mid-18th century amid efforts to mathematically describe musical string vibrations. In 1747, Jean le Rond d'Alembert derived the wave equation and its traveling-wave solution, assuming continuous functions for initial data. Leonhard Euler extended it to vibrating bodies, while Daniel Bernoulli (1730s1750s) argued solutions comprise infinite superpositions of standing sinusoidal modes, anticipating Fourier analysis. A controversy arose: d'Alembert and Euler questioned the convergence of Bernoulli's series for arbitrary initial displacements, as it violated the wave equation at t=0 unless f and g satisfy compatibility conditions; Bernoulli countered that physical strings admit only such expandable shapes, with discontinuities smoothed by neglected factors like finite propagation speed in matter. This debate spurred advances in analysis, including Fourier's 1807 proof of series convergence under Dirichlet conditions, resolving the issue for piecewise smooth data.

String Theory

String theory is a theoretical framework in particle physics and quantum gravity that models the fundamental constituents of matter and forces as tiny, one-dimensional vibrating strings rather than point-like particles. These strings, with lengths on the order of the Planck scale (approximately 103510^{-35}1035 meters), oscillate in specific modes that determine particle properties such as mass, charge, and spin. The theory aims to reconcile quantum mechanics with general relativity by providing a consistent quantum description of gravity, where the graviton emerges as the massless spin-2 vibrational mode of closed strings.
The origins trace to 1968, when Gabriele Veneziano derived a scattering amplitude for strong interactions between hadrons, which reproduced Regge trajectories and resonance spectra observed in experiments. This amplitude was reinterpreted in 19691970 by Yoichiro Nambu, Leonard Susskind, and Holger Nielsen as describing the quantum dynamics of relativistic strings, initially motivated by hadron physics rather than gravity. By 1973, the framework's inclusion of a massless spin-2 particle prompted a pivot toward quantum gravity, despite challenges like predicted long-range forces inconsistent with observations.
Early bosonic string theory, formulated in the 1970s, required 26 spacetime dimensions for anomaly cancellation and exhibited instabilities, including a tachyon state with imaginary mass indicating vacuum instability. In 1971, Andr Neveu and John Schwarz developed the superstring formulation by incorporating supersymmetry, which pairs bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom, eliminating the tachyon and reducing the critical dimension to 10. A pivotal advancement came in 1984, when Michael Green and John Schwarz proved the cancellation of anomalies in Type I superstring theory, confirming its internal mathematical consistency and reviving interest in the approach.
Five consistent perturbative superstring theories exist in 10 dimensions:

Type I: Open and closed strings with supersymmetry and SO(32) gauge symmetry.

Type IIA: Closed strings with supersymmetry, featuring both even and odd parity states.

Type IIB: Closed strings with supersymmetry, preserving chirality.

Heterotic SO(32): Closed strings combining left-moving supersymmetry with SO(32) gauge group.

Heterotic EE: Similar to SO(32) heterotic but with EE gauge symmetry.

These are unified under M-theory, conjectured by Edward Witten in 1995 as an 11-dimensional non-perturbative framework encompassing all superstring theories and 11-dimensional supergravity. M-theory incorporates extended objects like supermembranes and superfivebranes, with dualities (e.g., string-string and membrane-fivebrane) explaining connections between the five theories; its low-energy limit yields 11D supergravity.
To match four-dimensional observations, the extra six dimensions (or seven in M-theory) are compactified on small-scale manifolds, such as Calabi-Yau spaces, where the geometry influences particle masses via Kaluza-Klein modes and string winding. Compactification radii are typically near the string scale, RR \sim \sqrt{\alpha'}R, with \alpha' the Regge slope parameter related to string tension (T=1/(2)T = 1/(2\pi \alpha')T=1/(2)). T-duality relates theories at radii RRR and /R\alpha'/R/R, suggesting a minimum scale beyond which geometry self-dualizes. Particle spectra arise from string excitations, with mass squared M2M^2M2 proportional to oscillation number NNN and winding, yielding an infinite tower of states above observed particles.

Criticisms of String Theory

String theory has faced substantial criticism for its inability to produce falsifiable predictions amenable to experimental verification, despite over four decades of development since its inception in the late 1960s and major advancements in the 1980s. Proponents initially hoped it would unify quantum mechanics and general relativity, but critics argue that the theory's reliance on high-energy scales near the Planck lengtharound 10^{-35} metersrenders its consequences inaccessible to current or foreseeable accelerators like the Large Hadron Collider, which operates at energies up to 14 TeV. Peter Woit, in his 2006 book Not Even Wrong, contends that string theory evades the criterion of falsifiability central to scientific theories, famously invoking Wolfgang Pauli's dismissal of untestable ideas as "not even wrong." This view is echoed in analyses noting that while string theory incorporates the Standard Model and gravity, it fails to yield unique, quantitative predictions distinguishing it from alternatives.
A core technical issue amplifying this problem is the "landscape" of possible string theory vacua, estimated at 10^{500} or more distinct configurations arising from compactifications of extra dimensions and flux choices. Introduced prominently by Leonard Susskind around 2003, this landscape implies that nearly any low-energy physical constantsuch as the cosmological constant or particle massescan be accommodated by selecting an appropriate vacuum, undermining predictive power. Critics like Woit argue this turns string theory into a framework that retrofits observations rather than anticipates them, with the anthropic principle often invoked to explain fine-tuning without causal mechanism. Lee Smolin, in his 2006 book The Trouble with Physics, highlights how this vast parameter space, coupled with the absence of a non-perturbative formulation, has stalled progress toward a unique theory of everything.
Further mathematical critiques point to unresolved foundational challenges, including the lack of a complete, background-independent definition beyond perturbative approximations and difficulties in stabilizing moduli fields that determine the size and shape of extra dimensions. These issues persist despite efforts like M-theory unification in the mid-1990s, which promised resolution but delivered no verifiable outcomes. Woit describes string theory as a "degenerative research program" per Imre Lakatos's criteria, increasingly ad hoc and detached from empirical anchors, with resources diverted from rival approaches like loop quantum gravity. Smolin extends this to sociological concerns, alleging that string theory's dominance in academic hiring, funding, and prestigeparticularly in the U.S. since the 1990shas suppressed pluralism, though he positions it as one viable path among several rather than a outright failure.
Empirical null results, such as the absence of supersymmetric particles at the LHC after data collection exceeding 100 fb^{-1} by 2018, have not falsified string theory due to its flexibility but have eroded confidence among skeptics. While string theory has yielded mathematical insights, such as dualities and AdS/CFT correspondence applications to condensed matter physics, detractors maintain these do not compensate for its core deficit in addressing fundamental questions like the hierarchy problem or dark energy with testable specificity. This impasse has prompted some physicists to pivot toward phenomenological models or emergent gravity paradigms, viewing string theory's stagnation as evidence of overreliance on aesthetic criteria over evidentiary rigor.

Computing and Computer Science

String Data Type

In computer science, the string data type represents textual data as a finite sequence of characters drawn from a defined alphabet, such as ASCII or Unicode code points. This data type is fundamental for storing and manipulating human-readable content, including identifiers, messages, and configuration values in programs. Unlike numeric types, strings encode symbolic information, with each character typically occupying one or more bytes depending on the encoding scheme.
Implementation varies across programming languages. In C, strings lack a dedicated built-in type and are instead realized as null-terminated arrays of char elements, where the null character \0 (ASCII value 0) marks the end of the sequence to prevent buffer overruns during processing. For example, the declaration char str = "hello"; allocates five bytes for 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o' followed by \0. In contrast, Java treats strings as instances of the immutable String class, which internally uses a UTF-16 encoded array of char values, ensuring thread-safety and enabling optimizations like string interning for duplicate literals. Languages like Python similarly employ immutable strings for efficiency in operations such as hashing and concatenation.
Immutability is a common property in modern languages, meaning once created, a string's contents cannot be modified in place; operations like concatenation return new strings to avoid unintended side effects in concurrent environments and to facilitate secure caching in structures like hash tables. This design reduces memory corruption risks but can increase overhead for frequent modifications, prompting alternatives like mutable buffers (e.g., StringBuilder in Java) for performance-critical tasks.
Contemporary strings support Unicode to handle global text, encoding characters via standards like UTF-8 (variable-length bytes for backward ASCII compatibility) or UTF-16 (fixed two bytes per code point for BMP characters). The Unicode Consortium defines over 149,000 characters as of version 15.1 (September 2023), covering scripts from diverse languages, with strings managing code points rather than raw bytes to abstract encoding details. Common operations include length computation (e.g., strlen in C, counting bytes until \0), concatenation, substring extraction, and searching, often via library functions to ensure portability and efficiency.
// C example: Null-terminated string
#include <stdio.h>
int main() {
 char greeting = "Hello, world!\0";
 (/page/Printf)("%s\n", greeting); // Outputs the string
 return 0;
}
Variations persist; for instance, some languages like Go use UTF-8 slices for native efficiency, while others provide both byte and rune (Unicode code point) views to handle grapheme clusters accurately. These differences reflect trade-offs in memory usage, performance, and internationalization requirements.

String Algorithms and Processing

String algorithms and processing refer to computational methods for manipulating, searching, and analyzing sequences of characters, which are ubiquitous in software systems handling text data. These techniques optimize operations like pattern matching, sorting, and similarity measurement, often achieving sub-quadratic time complexities through preprocessing or specialized data structures. Efficiency is critical given the prevalence of strings in databases, web search, and bioinformatics, where naive approaches would scale poorly with large inputs.
A core class of string algorithms focuses on exact pattern searching, which identifies all occurrences of a substring (pattern) within a longer text. The naive approach compares the pattern against every possible alignment in the text, yielding O((n-m+1)m) worst-case time, where n is the text length and m the pattern length. More efficient linear-time alternatives preprocess the pattern to avoid redundant character comparisons. The Knuth-Morris-Pratt (KMP) algorithm, independently developed by Donald Knuth, Vaughan Pratt, and James H. Morris in 1977, constructs a prefix table (or failure function) that records the longest proper prefix matching a suffix for each pattern prefix, enabling skips during mismatches and achieving O(n + m) time overall.
The Boyer-Moore algorithm, formulated by Robert S. Boyer and J Strother Moore around 1975, contrasts by scanning from the pattern's end and leveraging two heuristics: the bad-character rule skips positions based on unseen characters in the text, while the good-suffix rule advances past verified suffixes. This backward matching excels on random or natural-language texts, with average-case performance often sublinear in n, though worst-case remains O(nm); variants like Boyer-Moore-Horspool simplify preprocessing for practical speedups.
String hashing supports rapid equality checks and searching by mapping strings to numeric values via rolling hashes, such as polynomial hashes over finite fields, reducing comparisons to integer operations while mitigating collisions through double hashing or large moduli. This approach underpins algorithms like Rabin-Karp, which preprocesses both text and pattern hashes for O(n + m) expected time.
For sorting variable-length strings, comparison-based methods like quicksort degrade to O(n log n * L) where L is average length due to character inspections, but radix sort avoids comparisons by distributing strings into buckets digit-by-digit. Least-significant-digit (LSD) radix sort pads shorter strings and processes from right to left using stable counting sort per digit, achieving O(n * L) time for fixed alphabets; most-significant-digit (MSD) variants handle recursion for uneven lengths efficiently in practice.
Approximate string matching addresses errors or variations via edit distance metrics. The Levenshtein distance, defined by Vladimir Levenshtein in 1965, quantifies the minimum insertions, deletions, or substitutions (each cost 1) to convert one string to another, computed via dynamic programming on a matrix where dp = min(dp + 1, dp + 1, dp + (s1 != s2)), yielding O(mn) time and space; optimizations like Hirschberg's algorithm reduce space to O(min(m,n)). This metric enables spell-checking and fuzzy search.
Regular expressions extend pattern processing by defining concise notations for matching complex string subsets, grounded in formal regular languages from Stephen Kleene's 1950s work. Implementations compile regex to finite automata for searching or substitution, supporting operations like alternation, quantification, and anchoring; backtracking engines handle nondeterminism but risk exponential time on pathological inputs, prompting alternatives like regex-directed acyclic graphs for efficiency in tools like grep or Python's re module.
Advanced structures like suffix trees and arrays preprocess strings for multiple queries. A suffix tree, as in Ukkonen's 1995 O(n) construction, represents all suffixes in a compressed trie, enabling operations like longest common substring in O(m) time; suffix arrays, simpler arrays of sorted suffix indices, approximate this with O(n log n) preprocessing and support pattern matching via binary search enhanced by LCP arrays. These are vital for genome assembly and plagiarism detection.
// Pseudocode for KMP prefix table computation
function compute_prefix_function(pattern):
 pi = array of size m, initialized to 0
 k = 0
 for i = 1 to m-1:
 while k > 0 and pattern != pattern:
 k = pi
 if pattern == pattern:
 k += 1
 pi = k
 return pi
Such preprocessing exemplifies how string algorithms balance space and time for real-world scalability.

Biological and Medical Sciences

Strings in Bioinformatics

In bioinformatics, biological macromolecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins are represented as strings over finite alphabets. DNA sequences consist of characters from {A, C, G, T}, RNA from {A, C, G, U}, and proteins from a 20-symbol alphabet of amino acids, enabling computational analysis of genetic and proteomic data. These string representations facilitate tasks like sequence similarity detection, which underpins phylogenetic studies and functional annotation.
A core operation is sequence alignment, where gaps are inserted into strings to maximize a similarity score, often using dynamic programming. The Needleman-Wunsch algorithm computes global alignments in O(nm) time for strings of lengths n and m, while Smith-Waterman enables local alignments for identifying conserved regions like genes or motifs. Heuristic tools like BLAST accelerate this by indexing query strings against databases via seed-and-extend matching, trading optimality for speed on large datasets.
Pattern matching in genomic strings employs exact algorithms such as Rabin-Karp, which uses rolling hashes to find substrings in O(n + m) average time, or Knuth-Morris-Pratt for worst-case efficiency, applied to tasks like restriction site detection. For approximate matching tolerant to sequencing errors, methods like gapped k-mer kernels compute kernel functions over substrings, supporting machine learning classifiers for sequence classification.
Efficient indexing of long strings, such as entire genomes exceeding billions of bases, relies on suffix trees or arrays. A suffix tree compresses all suffixes of a string into a trie-like structure, allowing substring queries in O(m) time after O(n) preprocessing, vital for repeat detection and motif discovery. Suffix arrays, space-efficient alternatives, sort suffix starting positions and support similar queries with enhancements like LCP arrays, scaling to terabyte-scale metagenomic data.
Genome assembly treats short reads as string fragments, constructing overlaps via string graphs where nodes are reads and edges denote significant overlaps, often computed using FM-index for Burrows-Wheeler transforms to handle repeats. Overlap-layout-consensus pipelines, like those in String Graph Assembler, resolve paths to form contigs, though challenges persist with repetitive regions longer than read lengths. De Bruijn graph variants model k-mers as nodes for higher coverage but remain rooted in string overlap principles for hybrid assemblies. These methods have assembled reference genomes like human GRCh38, integrating millions of reads with error rates below 0.1%.

Anatomical and Medical Uses

In human anatomy, chordae tendineae are thin, string-like tendinous cords composed of dense fibrous connective tissue that extend from the papillary muscles in the ventricles to the cusps of the atrioventricular valves, primarily preventing valvular prolapse during ventricular contraction. These structures, sometimes referred to as "heart strings," maintain valve integrity by tethering the leaflets, with variations in thickness and branching patterns observed across individuals; rupture can lead to severe mitral or tricuspid regurgitation.
Catgut sutures, derived from collagenous strands processed from sheep or bovine intestinal submucosa, represent a traditional medical application of string-like materials, introduced as absorbable ligatures by as early as the 2nd century BCE and widely used through the 20th century for internal wound closure due to their hydrolysis-based degradation within 721 days. Plain catgut, untreated for rapid absorption, finds application in procedures requiring short-term tensile strength, such as gastrointestinal anastomoses or obstetric repairs like episiotomies, though synthetic alternatives like polyglycolic acid have largely supplanted it to reduce inflammatory responses and variability in absorption rates. Chromic catgut, treated with chromium salts to extend durability up to 90 days, suits deeper tissues like fascia or urological sites, with studies confirming its efficacy in hand surgery without promoting epithelial complications.
Purse-string sutures employ a continuous string encircling tissue to achieve radial contraction, as in securing skin grafts or closing enterostomies, providing uniform tension via a drawstring mechanism that minimizes dead space and reduces infection risk.
Diagnostic string tests utilize ingested nylon or silk strings encapsulated in gelatin for non-invasive sampling of upper gastrointestinal contents, enabling detection of parasites like Giardia lamblia by withdrawing the string after 4 hours of duodenal transit, with sensitivity comparable to endoscopy in resource-limited settings. In esophageal applications, such as monitoring eosinophilic esophagitis, the test retrieves mucosal biopsies via a swallowed string retracted after overnight placement, yielding eosinophil counts without sedation and correlating with histologic inflammation scores. For pulmonary tuberculosis in non-productive cough patients, string retrieval from the stomach post-swallow captures swallowed sputum, enhancing yield over gastric lavage with low complication rates below 1%.

Engineering and Technology

Drilling and Oilfield Strings

In oil and gas drilling operations, a drill string consists of an assembled column of drill pipe, bottom-hole assembly (BHA) components, and attachments that connect the surface drilling rig to the drill bit at the well's bottom, transmitting rotational torque, drilling fluid (mud), and axial weight to facilitate borehole advancement. The drill string typically measures thousands of feet in length, with drill pipe forming the majority of its upper sectionstandard lengths of 30 feet per joint and outer diameters ranging from 3.5 to 6.625 inches, depending on well depth and formation characteristics. It operates under high mechanical stresses, including tension, compression, torsion, and fatigue from cyclic loading, necessitating materials like high-strength alloy steel compliant with American Petroleum Institute (API) specifications such as API 5DP.
Key components include:

Drill pipe: The primary tubulars that convey drilling fluid and power, featuring upset ends with welded tool joints for threaded connections; they provide structural integrity but minimal weight for bit penetration.

Heavy-weight drill pipe (HWDP): Transitional sections between drill pipe and BHA, with thicker walls (e.g., 0.51 inch) to dampen vibrations and add weight without excessive stiffness.

Drill collars: Thick-walled, non-upset pipes in the BHA (typically 68 inches OD, 30 feet long) that supply 8090% of the weight-on-bit (WOB), often comprising 400,000500,000 pounds of force in deep wells.

Bottom-hole assembly elements: Including the drill bit (e.g., tricone or PDC types), stabilizers for directional control, and subs for connections or measurement tools; the BHA enables steering in deviated or horizontal wells via rotary steerable systems.

During operations, the drill string is lowered, rotated (via top drive or kelly), and circulated with mud at pressures up to 5,000 psi to cool the bit, remove cuttings, and maintain borehole stability; tripping (removing and reinserting) can take hours per stand of 90 feet.
Beyond drilling, casing strings are steel pipes (API 5CT grade, e.g., J55 or L80) run into the borehole and cemented to isolate formations, prevent collapse, and protect aquifers from contamination; they are set in stagesconductor (2040 inch OD for shallow stability), surface (1320 inch to seal unconsolidated zones), intermediate (913 inch for high-pressure intervals), and production (4.57 inch liner or full string). Each string overlaps the previous by 100500 feet, with cement bonds verified by acoustic logging to withstand differential pressures exceeding 10,000 psi. Tubing strings, installed post-casing during completion, serve as the conduit for hydrocarbon production, typically 2.3754.5 inch OD seamless or welded pipes threaded into long assemblies (e.g., 40-foot joints) hung from the wellhead and perforated near the reservoir to allow inflow while excluding sand and enabling interventions like acidizing. Tubing withstands internal corrosion from H2S or CO2, often with premium connections like VAM TOP for gas-tight seals, and packs off with elastomeric seals for zonal isolation.
These strings collectively ensure well integrity across phases: drilling penetrates to target depth (up to 40,000 feet in ultra-deepwater), casing provides structural barriers compliant with regulations like API RP 65 for cementing, and tubing optimizes flow rates (e.g., 1,00010,000 barrels per day) while allowing workovers without disturbing casing. Failures, such as string parting from fatigue or corrosion, can lead to blowouts, as analyzed in incidents like Macondo (2010), underscoring the need for real-time monitoring via logging-while-drilling tools.

Aerodynamic and Control Strings

Control-line model aircraft utilize lightweight tethering lines, historically strings such as butcher's twine in the early 1940s, to mechanically transmit pilot inputs for flight control in a circular pattern around the operator. These lines, typically two in number for basic setups, connect a ground-based handle to the model's elevator servo or bellcrank, enabling elevation adjustments: equal tension maintains level flight, while differential pull induces climbs or dives by deflecting the elevator surface. The system's aerodynamics rely on the model's wing generating lift in a banked turn, with the tether providing centripetal force; post-World War II advancements in engines and airfoils elevated control-line flying to competitive classes like F2 aerobatics and speed, achieving velocities exceeding 200 mph in racing variants.
In ram-air parachutes for skydiving and powered parachutes, control linesknown as brake or steering linesattach to the canopy's trailing edge via rear risers, allowing jumpers or pilots to modulate the airfoil's camber and angle of attack for directional control and descent rate adjustment. Pulling a steering toggle stalls the corresponding rear cell quadrant, creating asymmetric drag and lift that induces yaw and roll for turns, with full deflection capable of 180-degree pivots in under 2 seconds on typical 7-cell canopies spanning 200-300 square feet. Aerodynamic efficiency stems from the ram-air inflation maintaining a high-lift airfoil, where line tension pre-sets a baseline glide ratio of 3:1, and differential inputs preserve stability without excessive sink rates, as validated in wind-tunnel tests of canopy deformation effects.
Both applications demand low-stretch, high-tensile materialssteel piano wire or Dyneema spectra for models, nylon or polyester spectra for parachutesto minimize lag in control response amid dynamic airflow forces up to several hundred pounds during maneuvers. Historical evolution from rudimentary twine tethers to engineered composites reflects causal trade-offs in weight, elasticity, and durability, prioritizing empirical flight stability over theoretical ideals unsubstantiated by testing.

Other Technological Applications

String potentiometers, also known as draw-wire sensors or cable-extension transducers, utilize a flexible steel wire or synthetic string attached to a spring-loaded spool that rotates a potentiometer or encoder to measure linear displacement with high precision. These devices convert the extension or retraction of the stringtypically ranging from 50 mm to over 50 metersinto an electrical signal proportional to position, enabling applications in industrial automation, robotics, crane monitoring, and elevator systems where non-contact or long-range linear measurement is required. The string's material, often stainless steel or coated polymer for durability and low friction, withstands repeated cycling and environmental exposure, with resolutions down to micrometers in advanced models.
In electrical engineering, pull stringsthin, durable cords or tapesare employed to guide wires or cables through conduits and walls, facilitating installations without extensive demolition. These strings, often nylon or fiberglass variants, are inserted via access points and used to draw heavier conductors, reducing labor and damage in retrofitting scenarios; for instance, they enable pulling multiple cables over distances up to hundreds of feet in commercial buildings. Unlike rigid rods, their flexibility navigates bends and obstacles, though they require manual tension control to avoid snags.
Tensile string elements also feature in advanced structural engineering, such as tensegrity systems where lightweight strings or cables provide counterbalancing tension to rigid compression members, enabling efficient, deployable architectures like space habitats or lightweight bridges. These applications leverage high-strength synthetic strings, such as Dyneema or Kevlar, which offer tensile strengths exceeding 3 GPa, far surpassing traditional materials while minimizing weight. Engineering analyses confirm their viability through mathematical modeling of equilibrium under load, though practical implementations remain limited by creep and fatigue concerns in dynamic environments.

Music

String Instruments

String instruments, classified as chordophones in the Hornbostel-Sachs system, produce sound primarily through the vibration of taut strings stretched between fixed points, often amplified by a resonator such as a soundboard or body cavity. This vibration generates transverse standing waves, with the fundamental pitch determined by the formula $ f = \frac{1}{2L} \sqrt{\frac{T}{\mu}} $, where $ L $ is the vibrating length, $ T $ is the tension, and $ \mu $ is the linear mass density; higher harmonics arise from wave divisions along the string, contributing to timbre. The earliest evidence of such instruments dates to approximately 2500 BCE, with artifacts like lyres and bow-shaped harps unearthed in Mesopotamian sites such as Ur, and precursors possibly derived from hunting bows.
Instruments are typically categorized by excitation method: plucked (e.g., lute-family members like guitar or harp, where fingers or plectra displace strings); bowed (e.g., violin or erhu, using friction from a rosin-coated bow of horsehair); and struck (e.g., piano or hammered dulcimer, via hammers or mallets impacting strings). Plucked types emphasize transient decays and rich overtones from irregular initial shapes, while bowed sustain steady-state vibrations through periodic forcing at the bow-string contact point. Global traditions include the Indian sitar (plucked with wire strings over sympathetic resonators), Chinese erhu (two-stringed bowed spike fiddle), and African kora (21-string harp-lute).
Construction involves a string bearer (neck or frame) and resonator, with strings historically of twisted animal gut from sheep or cattle intestines for low damping and warm tone, later supplanted by synthetics like nylon or steel for durability and consistent tension. Modern strings often feature a core (gut, nylon, or steel) wound with metals such as aluminum, copper, or silver to adjust mass and sustain lower pitches without excessive length. Instrument bodies use resonant woods like spruce for tops (high stiffness-to-weight ratio aiding vibration transmission) and maple for backs (denser for reflection), varnished to protect while minimally damping modes. Techniques vary culturally, from glissandi in bowed Asian fiddles to microtonal bends in Middle Eastern oud plucking, with amplification in ensembles relying on precise intonation via frets, fingerboards, or movable bridges.

String Ensembles and Performance Groups

String ensembles refer to musical groups composed primarily or exclusively of string instruments, including violins, violas, cellos, and double basses, performing repertoire tailored to their timbres and capabilities. These ensembles range from intimate chamber configurations, such as the string trio (one each of violin, viola, and cello) or string quartet (two violins, one viola, one cello), to larger string orchestras that feature multiple players per part without winds, brass, or percussion. The quartet form, emphasizing balanced dialogue among parts, became a hallmark of Western chamber music, enabling complex contrapuntal textures in works by composers from Haydn onward.
The development of string ensembles traces to the Baroque era's trio sonatas, but the modern string quartet crystallized in the Classical period under Joseph Haydn, who composed 68 quartets between approximately 1755 and 1803, establishing the genre's structural norms of four movements and egalitarian interplay. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart contributed 23 quartets, including the six dedicated to Haydn in 1785, while Ludwig van Beethoven's 16 quartets (17981826) pushed expressive and formal boundaries. Larger string orchestras, distinct from full symphonic bodies by their homogeneous timbre, gained prominence in the 20th century for transcriptions and original works, as seen in ensembles like the strings of the Academy of Ancient Music, founded in 1973, which perform period-instrument repertoire.
Notable performance groups have shaped the tradition through rigorous interpretation and innovation. The Busch Quartet, active from 1912 to 1951, set benchmarks for tonal precision in early recordings of Haydn and Beethoven. The Borodin Quartet, formed in 1945 and continuing with successors, specialized in Russian works like those of Shostakovich, performing over 2,500 concerts by 2015. Modern exemplars include the Kronos Quartet, established in 1973, which has commissioned over 900 new pieces, blending classical, avant-garde, and global influences across more than 6,000 live performances. The Juilliard String Quartet, debuting in 1946, has premiered dozens of contemporary quartets while maintaining fidelity to the core repertoire through annual residencies and recordings. These groups underscore string ensembles' adaptability, from chamber intimacysuited to venues under 500 seatsto orchestral scale, where divisi writing allows sectional depth without heterophonic dilution.

Arts, Entertainment, and Cultural Uses

String Figures and Traditional Games

String figures, also known as string games or cat's cradles, consist of intricate patterns formed by manipulating a closed loop of string, typically 12 meters long, between the fingers or hands of one or more participants. These figures range from simple geometric shapes to complex representational designs depicting animals, objects, or mythological elements, often created sequentially in games where players pass the string configuration to each other. Cat's cradle, one of the most recognized variants, involves at least eight distinct transformations passed between two players, originating in European traditions but paralleled in numerous non-Western cultures.
Anthropological documentation of string figures dates to the late 19th and early 20th centuries, with systematic collections emerging around 1906 when Caroline Furness Jayne published an encyclopedia of over 200 figures drawn from Europe, Native American, and Pacific Islander sources. In 1911, Kathleen Haddon compiled "Cat's Cradle in Many Lands," cataloging figures from global expeditions and highlighting their ties to racial history, mythology, and fortune-telling practices. These efforts, influenced by diffusionist theories, aimed to trace human migrations through shared motifs, though a 2024 phylogenetic analysis of 1,098 figures from 67 societies challenges pure independent invention, providing evidence for cultural diffusion or common ancestry via computational modeling of design similarities.
String figures appear ubiquitously across indigenous and traditional societies, with archaeological proxies suggesting prehistoric origins using sinew or plant fibers as early as the Stone Age. In Arctic Inuit communities, they served ritual purposes, such as warding off spirits or marking seasonal transitions, while Navajo practitioners employ them to embody hzha cosmological balancethrough storytelling that illustrates natural cycles and human-environment relations. Hawaiian hei figures function as mnemonic devices for ancestral knowledge recovery, and Australian Yolu designs encode cross-cultural exchanges, sometimes integrated into contemporary art to preserve oral traditions. African examples, documented in early 20th-century surveys like those in Nigeria, reveal ritual efficacy in Vanuatu contexts, where construction methods adhere to taboos for magical potency.
Beyond recreation, these games foster cognitive skills, including spatial reasoning and sequential memory, with ethnographic reports noting their use in shamanic practices to influence interpersonal or environmental dynamics. In many Pacific and Native American groups, figures doubled as educational tools for transmitting lore, such as animal migrations or celestial maps, underscoring their role in material culture evolution rather than mere pastime. Modern analyses, leveraging graph theory, reveal mathematical underpinnings like topological invariants across disparate figures, affirming their inadvertent contribution to combinatorial geometry.

String Art and Visual Media

String art encompasses visual artworks formed by stretching taut threads or strings between fixed points, such as nails hammered into a backing board, to produce geometric patterns, curves, or representational images through the intersection and layering of lines. The method relies on the optical illusion created by overlapping straight segments, which collectively simulate continuous curves like parabolas or catenaries, rooted in mathematical envelope theory where families of lines tangent to a curve generate its shape.
The practice traces to the mid-19th century, when British mathematician and educator Mary Everest Boole (18321916) developed "curve stitching" as a tactile tool for teaching children algebraic and geometric principles, such as linear equations and conic sections, by pinning paper and stitching lines to reveal emergent curves without direct drawing. Boole's approach, detailed in her 1904 book Philosophy and Fun of Algebra, emphasized kinesthetic learning to demystify abstract math. By the 1960s, string art evolved into a mainstream decorative craft in Western cultures, popularized via hobby kits sold by companies like the Spear Company and featured in books such as String Art by George W. Hart, often using colored threads on circular or polygonal nail arrangements to form symmetrical designs like hypocycloids.
In visual media, string art has manifested in sculptural installations and site-specific works that exploit scale, light, and space for immersive effects. American artist Sue Fuller pioneered fine-art applications in the mid-20th century, as in her 1964 String Composition No. 128, executed with nylon thread on painted Masonite to evoke kinetic energy and modernist abstraction influenced by her studies under Josef Albers. Mexican artist Gabriel Dawe's Plexus series, begun around 2010, deploys thousands of meters of uncolored sewing thread across gallery ceilings to refract light into gradient rainbows, transforming empty volumes into ethereal, volumetric spectra. Similarly, Anne Patterson's 2010 installation Graced with Light suspended approximately 1,100 translucent ribbons in a stairwell, mimicking stained-glass illumination to explore luminosity and ephemerality.
Contemporary advancements incorporate computation: in 2016, Greek engineer-artist Petros Vrellis devised an algorithm optimizing string layers to approximate grayscale images, layering darker paths over lighter ones on nail frames to achieve photorealistic portraits, as demonstrated in works like A New Way to Knit, which required programming to minimize thread overlaps while maximizing contrast fidelity. Japanese-born artist Chiharu Shiota, active since the 1990s, scales string into labyrinthine websoften black thread entangled with everyday objects like keys or shoesin installations such as those at the 2015 Venice Biennale, symbolizing interconnectedness and psychological traces through dense, maze-like networks spanning entire rooms. These evolutions highlight string art's transition from pedagogical tool to versatile medium in visual media, blending analog precision with digital simulation for both intimate panels and monumental environments.

Representations in Film, Literature, and Media

In literature, strings often symbolize interpersonal connections, fragility, or control. In John Green's Paper Towns (2008), the metaphor of internal "strings" breaking represents emotional disintegration and strained relationships, as articulated by characters to describe personal hardships. Similarly, in Khaled Hosseini's The Kite Runner (2003), kite strings embody power dynamics, ethical bonds, and the tension between freedom and restraint, with the string's cutting signifying triumphs or betrayals in kite-fighting competitions central to the narrative. In Guy de Maupassant's short story "The Piece of String" (1883), a discarded string becomes a pivotal symbol of unfounded suspicion and rural pettiness, leading to the protagonist's social ruin despite his innocence.
Strings also evoke fate or linkage in various works. Jonathan Safran Foer's Everything Is Illuminated (2002) employs a "white string" as a motif for human trails and relational ties across generations and migrations. Charlotte Bront's Jane Eyre (1847) uses the image of a heart-tethered string to convey romantic dependency, with Rochester describing an invisible cord linking him to Jane. Kurt Vonnegut's Cat's Cradle (1963) integrates string figures like cat's cradle as a narrative device for exploring atomic peril and invented religion, with the game mirroring the precarious weaving of human knowledge and destruction.
In film and television, strings frequently appear as visual tropes for investigation or manipulation. A common clich in crime dramas and thrillers involves "string boards"walls pinned with photos, notes, and red strings connecting suspects or cluesto depict detectives mapping conspiracies, originating in films like Zodiac (2007) and popularized in series such as Mindhunter (20172019), though real forensic work rarely employs such literal setups. Puppet strings symbolize artificial control in adaptations like Disney's Pinocchio (1940), where the boy's marionette origins highlight themes of autonomy versus predetermination, with strings visibly dictating movement until liberation.
Broader media representations include metaphorical uses in journalism, where "stringers"freelance correspondents providing on-the-ground reportsderive from the term's historical connotation of tied-off contributions, as in early 20th-century wire services like the Associated Press, which compensated stringers per story line. In contemporary digital media, string figures serve as analogies for networked information flows, as in analyses of malleable online patterns, underscoring strings' role in abstracting connectivity without literal depiction. These portrayals consistently draw on strings' physical propertiestensile strength, entanglement, and severanceto illustrate causal links in human affairs, grounded in observable mechanics rather than unsubstantiated symbolism.

Everyday and Miscellaneous Uses

In Fashion and Apparel

Drawstrings, narrow cords or strings threaded through fabric casings or eyelets, enable adjustable gathering in garments such as waists, hoods, and necklines, providing a customizable fit that accommodates varying body sizes without rigid fasteners. This mechanism traces back to practical uses in securing pouches for coins and goods, with applications in clothing emerging prominently in casual and activewear like sweatpants and pajamas by the late 20th century. In modern apparel manufacturing, drawstring waists facilitate secure yet flexible closure, often paired with toggles for tension control.
Shoelaces, typically paired strings of woven cotton, nylon, or polyester finished with aglets, secure footwear by interlacing through eyelets in patterns that distribute tension evenly across the foot. Over 60 distinct lacing methods exist, ranging from standard crisscross for even pressure to decorative variants like lattice for aesthetic appeal in sneakers and boots. These strings enhance stability during movement, with flat profiles preferred for low-friction sports shoes and round cords for durability in work boots.
In accessories, strings form the base for neckwear like bolo ties, consisting of flexible leather cords knotted or slidably fastened with metal tips and ornamental clasps, which gained popularity in the 1930s among Southwestern U.S. communities for both utility and style. Such ties, adjustable via sliding mechanisms, allow positioning of decorative elements while maintaining a loose fit around the collar. Bolo ties often feature silver or turquoise slides weighing 20-50 grams, contributing to their heft in Western apparel ensembles.
Thin ribbon strings, known as hanger loops, sewn into shoulder seams of garments, prevent slipping from wire or plastic hangers during storage, particularly in dresses and blouses with wide necklines where gravity causes sagging. These loops, typically 5-10 cm long, distribute weight to maintain shape and reduce creasing over time. In production, they add minimal material costunder 0.5% of garment expenseswhile extending usability in retail and consumer settings.

Culinary and Food Contexts

String beans, also known as green beans or snap beans (Phaseolus vulgaris), are the unripe pods of the common bean plant, harvested for their tender texture and mild flavor. Historically, many heirloom varieties featured a tough, fibrous string running along the pod's suture line, requiring a preparatory technique called "stringing" or effilerpulling the string away after snapping the pod's endto render them palatable and prevent chewiness during cooking. This practice diminished with the development of stringless hybrids in the early 20th century, such as the 1910 introduction of the 'Refugee' variety by the Burpee seed company, which prioritized ease of preparation for commercial and home use. Originating in the Andean regions of South America, where indigenous peoples domesticated the plant around 7,000 years ago, string beans spread globally after their introduction to Europe by Spanish explorers in the 16th century following Columbus's 1492 voyages. In culinary applications, they are blanched, sauted, or slow-cooked; a traditional Southern U.S. method involves simmering with pork fatback for hours to infuse savory depth, contrasting modern preferences for crisp-tender textures achieved via brief steaming or stir-frying.
String cheese denotes a family of fresh cheeses processed into separable strands through plasticization, where heated curd is stretched and molded. Primarily made from cow's milk mozzarella in Western markets, its stringy quality arises from the alignment of protein fibers during kneading at temperatures around 7080C (158176F), a technique rooted in ancient cheesemaking traditions of the Mediterranean and Middle East dating back over 2,000 years. Regional variants include Armenian chechil, a smoked, braided string cheese flavored with herbs or spices like nigella seeds, often twisted into ropes for fermentation; Syrian jibneh malak or "king's cheese," immersed in brine; and Middle Eastern chechil analogs consumed fresh or aged. In the U.S., commercial string cheese emerged as a snack in the 1970s, with brands like Polly-O popularizing 1-ounce (28 g) sticks, which provide about 80 calories and 6 grams of protein per serving due to their low-moisture, high-protein composition. It is typically eaten by peeling strands lengthwise, though some types incorporate cheddar or Colby for flavor variation.
String hoppers, or idiyappam in Tamil and indi appa in Sinhala, are a steamed dish of rice flour dough extruded into fine, vermicelli-like strands and shaped into nests or discs. Native to South Indian and Sri Lankan cuisines, this preparation uses roasted rice flour mixed with water into a dough pressed through a multi-holed sevai press onto woven bamboo or cloth mats for steaming, yielding light, porous textures after 510 minutes. Typically served at breakfast or dinner with coconut sambol, vegetable curries, or egg masala, a standard recipe yields 200250 grams of flour for 810 hoppers, providing gluten-free carbohydrates around 70 grams per 100-gram serving. Variations include sweet versions with jaggery or savory fillings, reflecting adaptations in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and Sri Lanka where rice flour ratios and steaming times adjust for regional humidity and altitude.
Kitchen twine, a food-grade cotton or linen string, serves practical roles in food assembly, such as trussing poultry to promote uniform roasting by compacting limbs and cavity, or bundling herbs into bouquets garnis for easy infusion and removal during simmering. Untreated and heat-resistant up to 200C (392F), it prevents unraveling of rolled meats like roulades, ensuring even spice distribution and moisture retention; a common gauge is #18 ply for strength without burning. Historical use traces to medieval European kitchens for spit-roasting, evolving into modern techniques like la ficellesuspending tied proteins over open flames for controlled browning.

Sports Equipment and Activities

In racket sports such as tennis and badminton, strings form the striking surface of the racket, enabling ball or shuttlecock propulsion through tensioned weaving across the frame. Tennis racket strings originated in 1875 when Pierre Babolat produced the first set from natural sheep gut in France, providing elasticity and power that remain prized today despite modern alternatives. Contemporary tennis strings fall into four primary categories: natural gut for superior feel and tension maintenance; synthetic gut for affordable durability mimicking gut's properties; multifilament strings, often nylon-based, for comfort and shock absorption; and polyester monofilaments for spin generation and control, favored in professional play since the late 1990s due to their stiffness. String tension, typically 40-65 pounds, influences power versus control, with lower tensions yielding more power and higher ones enhancing precision, as determined by player preference and equipment testing.
Badminton racket strings, primarily multifilament nylon for repulsion and repulsion speed, are strung at tensions of 20-35 pounds to optimize shuttlecock trajectory in fast-paced rallies. Available in gauges of 20 (thickest, most durable), 21, and 22 (thinnest, offering sharper response but less longevity), these strings prioritize thin profiles for heightened shuttle feel, with brands like Yonex emphasizing repulsion in models such as BG66. Similar stringing applies to squash and racquetball, where multifilament or hybrid setups balance durability against court abrasion.
Archery employs bowstrings to draw and release the bow limbs, propelling arrows via stored elastic energy. Traditional bowstrings used natural fibers like flax or hemp, but modern compound and recurve bows favor synthetic materials such as Dacron for recurve bows or high-modulus polyethylene like Dyneema for low stretch and precision in competitive target shooting. String servingprotective windings at contact pointsprevents wear, with custom lengths tailored to bow draw (recurve strings 4 inches shorter than bow length, longbows 3 inches).
Yo-yoing, recognized as a competitive sport with international championships since the 1990s, relies on looped polyester strings for responsive sleep, binds, and tricks like string ladders or stalls. Strings, adjustable for length via slip knots, enable divisions such as 1A (single-handed on-string) and 3A (dual-handed), where material slimness affects slack and responsiveness critical for advanced maneuvers. Professional play favors 100% polyester over cotton for reduced friction and durability during extended sessions.

References

What is string theory? - Space

 String Theory - DAMTP

The roots and fruits of string theory - CERN Courier

Long and Winding Road: A Conversation with String Theory Pioneer

Why String Theory Is Still Not Even Wrong | Scientific American

Why String Theory? | Not Even Wrong - Columbia Math Department

Contested Boundaries: The String Theory Debates and Ideologies of ...

 1 Strings

 Introduction to the Theory of Computation Languages, Automata and ...

 Lecture 2 Strings and Sets - Cornell: Computer Science

 Contents

 1 Strings

 Formal Language Practical Introduction

 Sets, Functions, Sequences, Sums, and Matrices - Computer Science

 cse303 ELEMENTS OF THE THEORY OF COMPUTATION

 Introduction to the Theory of Computation Some Notes for CIS511

5.1 Formal Languages - Introduction to Programming in Java

 Chapter 6 Formal Language Theory

 Chapter 1 Basics of Formal Language Theory - UPenn CIS

 Formal Language Theory - Department of Computer Science

 Lecture 2: Strings, Languages, DFAs

Formal language theory: refining the Chomsky hierarchy - PMC - NIH

 Theory of Computation Alphabets, Strings & Formal Languages ...

 1 Strings

 Derivation of the Wave Equation

d'Alembert's Solution -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Differential Equations - Vibrating String - Pauls Online Math Notes

D'Alembert and the Wave Equation: Its Disputes and Controversies

Daniel Bernoulli's Modal Decomposition - Stanford CCRMA

The vibrating string controversy | American Journal of Physics

Untangling the origin of string theory - CERN

 M-Theory (the Theory Formerly Known as Strings)

Is String Theory Even Wrong? | American Scientist

Is String Theory Testable? | Not Even Wrong

The String Theory Landscape | Scientific American

Lost in the landscape - CERN Courier

The Crisis in String Theory is Worse Than You Think

String theory is dead | Peter Woit - IAI TV

Response to Criticism - Lee Smolin

String Data Type Programming Fundamentals - Rebus Press

String Data Type - Visual Basic | Microsoft Learn

Strings in C - GeeksforGeeks

String (Java Platform SE 8 ) - Oracle Help Center

Java Strings - GeeksforGeeks

Why are strings immutable in many programming languages?

The Unicode standard - Globalization | Microsoft Learn

Strings in C (With Examples) - Programiz

String Algorithms - Ray and Stephanie Lane Computational Biology ...

Prefix function - Knuth-Morris-Pratt - CP-Algorithms

The Boyer-Moore Fast String Searching Algorithm

String Hashing - Algorithms for Competitive Programming

5.1 String Sorts - Algorithms, 4th Edition

Levenshtein Distance - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

Regular Expression HOWTO Python 3.14.0 documentation

Biological Sequences - NCBI

Handling biological sequences in R with the bioseq package - Keck

Biological Sequence Analysis - Computational Biology - NCBI - NIH

 Algorithms in Bioinformatics: Lectures 03-05 - Sequence Similarity

 String Matching Problems and Bioinformatics

FastSK: fast sequence analysis with gapped string kernels

 Algorithms in Bioinformatics: Lecture 09: Suffix Trees and Variants

A bioinformatician's guide to the forefront of suffix array construction ...

Efficient construction of an assembly string graph using the FM-index

Integration of string and de Bruijn graphs for genome assembly

Genome assembly composition of the String ACGT array: a review ...

New algorithms for accurate and efficient de novo genome assembly ...

Chordae Tendineae - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

Heart Anatomy | Patient Education | Willis-Knighton Cardiology

Catgut - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

Catgut Suture-Surgical Sutures Manufacturer

Is Catgut Really Obsolete? Experience with Buried Subcuticular ...

Back To The Suture: Purse String - Anatomy Guy

What to Know About the String Test - WebMD

Implementation of the esophageal string test in clinical practice and ...

Use of string test and stool specimens to diagnose pulmonary ... - NIH

 Drill string and components - IADC

Components of Bottom Hole Assembly - Drillopedia

Drill String: What It Is and How It Works - Sinodrills

Components of the drill string - Oil and Gas Engineering

What is a Drill String? How Does it Work in Drilling? - BOP Products

Drill String Component - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

Types Of Casing In Drilling Oilfield Wells

casing string - Energy Glossary - SLB

Oil Well Construction: Casing and Tubing - Thermo Fisher Scientific

Drilling, casing, tubing: the three phases of a wellbore - Voestalpine

Casing String - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics

 Biography of LOUIS J. (LOU) ANDREWS

F2 - Control Line | World Air Sports Federation - FAI.org

 Chapter 5: Aerodynamics of Flight - Federal Aviation Administration

Skydiving Article - Basic Aerodynamics of a Ram-Air Parachute

 Wind-tunnel investigation of the static aerodynamic characteristics of ...

 Aerodynamics of Parachute Opening - DTIC

String Potentiometer and String Encoder Engineering Guide

Draw-wire sensors for position measurement - Micro-Epsilon

Types of String Potentiometers - TE Connectivity

Electrical Pull String: Myths and Facts for Electrical Engineers

Strings as Structural Elements? Engineers Devise Mathematics for ...

Hornbostel-Sachs - OnMusic Dictionary - Term

 Sachs-Hornbostel Classification of Musical Instruments.pdf

Vibrating Strings - UConn Physics

Strings, standing waves and harmonics - phys.unsw

Origins of Stringed Instruments | Smithsonian Institution

The Evolution in Forms of Lutes and other Stringed Instruments ...

Pluck it or Bow it: a Beginner's Guide to String Instruments

An Introduction to String Instruments - Musical U

The physics of guitar string vibrations - AIP Publishing

Construction of a string | Thomastik-Infeld Vienna

Alternative Materials Gamut Music. Inc.

https://www.3d-varius.com/musical-instrument-strings-making/

Wood Types, Materials, and Construction Methods in Fine String ...

ATLAS of Plucked Instruments | Binary Heap - WordPress.com

Understand strings ensembles - Capsule Blog

String Quartet | Music 101 - Lumen Learning

Exploring the String Quartet - The First 250 Years - earsense

Chamber vs orchestral: what's the difference? - Classical-Music.com

The ten greatest string quartet ensembles of all time - Classical Music

String Quartet: History & Top Quartets to Listen to - Violinspiration

A global cross-cultural analysis of string figures reveals evidence of ...

String figures: our shared history of play, culture, and mathematics

 String figures; a study of cat's-cradle in many lands

String Theory. A bit of twine transformed between two - Medium

String figures shed light on cultural connections and the roots of ...

https://www.sarahssilks.com/blogs/journal/119364547-string-games-and-brain-development

'String games' arrive with the snow - ICT News

What the Navajo string game can teach us the human role in ... - SOAS

 Hei, Hawaiian String Figures - Kamehameha Publishing

Remembering the string figures of Yirrkala - Garland Magazine

Nigerian String Games - Entanglements

Cultural and cognitive aspects of string figure-making in the ...

String Figures and Shamanism - HUNA INTERNATIONAL

The Surprising Science and Hidden History of Traditional String ...

The history of string art

 A Greedy Algorithm for Generative String Art - The Bridges Archive

https://brightmnds.com/blogs/news/history-of-string-art-from-math-to-masterpieces

https://www.stringoftheart.com/blogs/news/a-deep-dive-into-the-history-of-string-art

Common Threads In Focus | Tate

https://www.stringoftheart.com/blogs/news/string-art-installations-around-the-world

The Most Impressive String Installations in the World

Web-Like String Installations by Chiharu Shiota Hold ... - Colossal

8 Contemporary Artists That Take String Art to the Next Level

Paper Towns: Symbols - SparkNotes

(PDF) Kites and String as Metaphors for Control and Freedom in The ...

What imagery and symbols are present in "The Piece of String"?

White String in Everything Is Illuminated - Shmoop

What We Call a String: On Love, Dependency, and the Self

A Brief History of String | Sabrina Gschwandtner - Cabinet Magazine

In crime TV shows, there are often boards with pictures and strings ...

String - Etymology, Origin & Meaning

Variations on the string figure as imaginary digital medium

Drawstrings are a cinch on fashions for spring - SouthCoast Today

What is a drawstring waist? - Clothing Manufacturer

Shoe Lacing Methods - Ian Fieggen

Shoe Lace STYLES | Types of Shoelaces | Victor de Banke

As Fashion Goes Western (Again), I'm All In on Bolo Ties | Vogue

https://www.montanasilversmiths.com/jewelry/signature-line/bolo-ties.html

What are the hang strings on shirts? - Quora

National Bean Day: Learn About The History Of Green Beans

In Defense of the Olive-Drab, Slow-Cooked String Bean | Saveur

What is String Cheese? What Kind of Cheese is String Cheese?

https://charqute.com/blogs/news/the-joy-of-string-cheese-a-deep-dive-into-its-making-and-pairing

What Makes String Cheese Stringy? - Organic Valley

Idiyappam Recipe | Nool Puttu (String Hoppers)

String Hoppers - My Lankan Food Journal

What Is Butchers Twine? - The Spruce Eats

https://www.webstaurantstore.com/guide/880/types-of-twine.html

The history of natural gut strings and why they're still used in tennis ...

https://www.tennis-warehouse.com/learning_center/gear_guides/tennis_string/material_gauge_tension_explained.html

Understanding Tennis String Construction And Why It Matters - Forbes

Guide to Badminton Strings - The Racket Surgery

https://www.badmintonavenue.com/collections/strings

https://lancasterarchery.com/collections/bowstrings-string-making

https://www.3riversarchery.com/buy/bows/bow-strings

https://duncantoys.com/blogs/blog/understanding-the-sport-of-yo-yoing

Yoyo String - YoYoTricks.com

25 Pack Yoyo Strings - Professional Polyester Replacement Yoyo ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion