Symbol table Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Symbol table
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A symbol table is a fundamental data structure in compilers and interpreters that stores mappings between program identifierssuch as variable names, function names, and type namesand their associated attributes, including data types, scopes, storage details, and declaration locations. This structure enables efficient management of symbols encountered during program analysis, supporting operations like insertion at declaration and lookup for references.
The primary purpose of a symbol table is to facilitate semantic analysis by providing a centralized repository for symbol information, which helps detect errors such as undeclared variables, duplicate declarations, or type mismatches. It is typically built incrementally during the parsing phase, with entries added when sufficient context about a symbol is available, and consulted across all compiler phases, from lexical scanning to code generation. Attributes stored may include the symbol's class (e.g., variable, procedure, or constant), line numbers of declarations and uses, and runtime allocation details, varying by language and compiler design.
Common implementations leverage hash tables for average O(1) lookup and insertion times, though alternatives like binary search trees or sequential search structures are used for ordered access or simpler scenarios. In languages with nested scopes, such as C++ or Java, symbol tables employ hierarchical mechanismslike stacks of tables or parent pointersto enforce static scoping rules, ensuring symbols are resolved in the most closely nested enclosing scope. This design not only aids in error checking but also supports optimization and intermediate code generation by tracking symbol visibility and dependencies.

Fundamentals

Definition and Purpose

A symbol table is a data structure used by compilers and interpreters to store information about identifiers in a program, mapping names such as variables, functions, and constants to their associated metadata like types and bindings during program analysis or execution. In programming languages, identifiers serve as tokens representing entities declared in the source code, enabling the compiler to track and reference them systematically without delving into lexical parsing details.
The primary purposes of a symbol table include facilitating semantic analysis by supporting type checking and scope resolution, where it provides quick access to verify the correctness of identifier usages against their declarations. It also aids code generation by associating symbols with memory locations or intermediate representations, and supports debugging by mapping runtime addresses back to human-readable names for easier inspection. Furthermore, during linking, the symbol table resolves external references by locating definitions and relocating symbolic addresses across object files.
Key benefits of symbol tables lie in their efficiency for lookup operations, often achieving average O(1) time complexity when implemented with hash tables, which ensures rapid retrieval during compilation phases. This structure also promotes correctness by maintaining consistent handling of declarations and usages, reducing errors in complex programs.

Historical Development

Symbol tables originated in the 1950s alongside the development of early assemblers and compilers, serving as basic mechanisms for mapping symbolic names to memory locations. Nathaniel Rochester's assembler for the IBM 701, introduced around 1954, represented an early implementation, employing a rudimentary symbol tableusing hashing for efficient lookupsto resolve labels and addresses during assembly. This approach addressed the limitations of pure machine code programming by allowing symbolic notation, with the table storing up to a limited number of entries before requiring manual intervention or reloading. Similarly, the Symbolic Optimal Assembly Program (SOAP) for the IBM 650, operational by 1955, explicitly used a symbol table to track and optimize symbolic references, marking a foundational step in automated symbol resolution.
Key milestones in the 1950s and 1960s further formalized symbol tables for high-level language features. The FORTRAN I compiler, released by IBM in 1957, introduced structured handling of variable symbols and scoping, storing identifiers and their attributes to enable translation from algebraic expressions to machine code while managing memory allocation. Algol 60, published in 1960, advanced this by incorporating block-structured scoping, which necessitated nested symbol tables to track visibility rules across lexical scopesinner blocks could access outer declarations, influencing subsequent languages like Pascal and C. In the 1970s, Pascal compilers, such as the original implementation completed in 1970, enhanced symbol tables by integrating detailed type information, allowing storage of user-defined types alongside identifiers to support strong typing and error checking during compilation.
The evolution of symbol tables was driven by the transition from low-level assembly to high-level languages, requiring robust metadata management for scoping, typing, and optimization. The Multics operating system in the 1960s exemplified this shift, using symbol tables within segments for dynamic linking, where external references were resolved at runtime by searching target segment tables to form generalized addresses without modifying source code. In modern contexts, symbol tables adapted to just-in-time (JIT) compilation in Java, introduced in 1995, where runtime compilers maintain per-method symbol tables to track constants, types, and offsets for efficient bytecode-to-native translation. Likewise, Python's initial 0.9.1 release in 1991 incorporated symbol tables for function locals and globals, enabling lexical scoping in scripting environments by layering local, global, and built-in namespaces.

Core Components

Entries and Attributes

In compiler design, each entry in a symbol table represents an identifier and associates it with a structured record containing essential metadata to support semantic analysis and code generation. Typically, this record includes the identifier's name as a string, its data typesuch as integer, function pointer, or arrayand storage details like an assigned memory address or offset within a data segment. Visibility flags are also stored to indicate accessibility levels, such as public or private, ensuring proper access control during compilation. These core fields enable the compiler to resolve references and allocate resources efficiently.
Common attributes in symbol table entries extend beyond basic identification to facilitate various compiler phases. For instance, the declaration line number is recorded to aid in error reporting, allowing precise diagnostics for issues like undeclared variables. The size of the symbol in bytes is included to support memory allocation during the code generation phase. Linkage type, distinguishing internal (local to a module) from external (visible across modules), is maintained to handle inter-module integration. Optional annotations may capture additional details, such as constant values for literals or array dimensions for multi-dimensional structures, enhancing optimization opportunities.
Variations in entry attributes arise based on the target programming language's features. In languages like C, entries incorporate type qualifiers such as const or volatile to reflect storage class specifiers and modifier behaviors. For object-oriented languages, symbol table entries often include links to class hierarchies and inheritance relationships, enabling the compiler to track method overriding and polymorphism. These language-specific extensions ensure that the symbol table captures nuanced semantic information relevant to the paradigm.
To maintain data integrity, symbol tables enforce uniqueness of identifiers within the same scope through insertion mechanisms that check for existing entries before adding new ones, thereby preventing redeclaration errors and ensuring consistent name resolution. This validation is typically performed during the semantic analysis phase, using hash-based lookups to detect duplicates efficiently.

Scope Management

Scope management in symbol tables governs how identifiers are associated with their declarations across different regions of a program, ensuring proper visibility and avoiding ambiguities during compilation or execution. This involves defining scope types, establishing resolution rules for name lookups, managing the lifetimes of symbol entries, and addressing challenges such as name clashes in large-scale codebases.
Symbol tables distinguish between lexical (static) scoping and dynamic scoping to handle identifier visibility. In lexical scoping, the scope of an identifier is determined by the program's static structure, such as nested blocks or functions, allowing compile-time resolution where inner declarations can access outer ones unless shadowed. For example, in languages like C or Java, a variable declared in a function block is visible only within that block and any nested blocks, based on the code's textual layout. In contrast, dynamic scoping resolves identifiers at runtime according to the current call stack, where the binding depends on the execution path rather than code position; this approach, used in early Lisp dialects or via specific constructs in Perl, such as the 'local' keyword, enables more flexible but potentially unpredictable name resolution by searching active function environments.
Name resolution in symbol tables employs algorithms that search scopes hierarchically to locate identifiers, typically starting from the innermost scope and proceeding outward to outer scopes until a match is found or the global scope is exhausted. This process supports shadowing, where an inner declaration overrides an outer one with the same name, ensuring local symbols take precedence without affecting global or enclosing scopes. Global symbols, stored in the outermost scope, remain accessible across the program unless shadowed by locals, while local symbols are confined to their declaring scope, promoting modularity. For instance, in a nested block structure, a reference to an identifier first checks the current block's table; if absent, it queries enclosing scopes sequentially.
The lifetime of symbol entries aligns with scope boundaries: entries are inserted into the symbol table upon declaration, typically during semantic analysis, and are removed or hidden upon scope exit to free resources and maintain isolation. In stack-based implementations, this involves pushing a new scope table on entry and popping it on exit, discarding local entries while preserving outer ones.
Challenges in scope management include preventing name clashes in modular or multi-file code, which symbol tables address through mechanisms like namespaces and modules. In C++, namespaces organize symbols into named regions to avoid collisions in large projects, with the compiler resolving qualified names (e.g., std::cout) by searching within specified namespace scopes during lookup. Similarly, Python 3 employs modules as private symbol tables for each file, supporting explicit imports to resolve names across modules and mitigate clashes, with enhancements like implicit namespace packages introduced in Python 3.3 (2012) for better handling of distributed code. These features ensure scalability in complex systems by encapsulating scopes without relying solely on hierarchical searching.

Implementation Approaches

Static Implementation

Static symbol tables are constructed during the front-end phases of compilation, specifically through sequential population during lexical analysis, parsing, and semantic analysis. As the parser processes declarations in the source code, identifiers such as variables and functions are entered into the table along with their attributes, often by performing linear passes over the abstract syntax tree (AST) to resolve scopes and types. Semantic analysis then refines these entries, linking them to type information and checking for errors like redeclarations, ensuring the table captures the program's static structure before code generation.
For data structures, static implementations typically employ arrays or hash tables to manage flat scopes efficiently, where entries are stored in fixed-size arrays for simple programs or chained hash tables for faster access in larger ones. Nested scopes are handled using simple tree structures, such as linked environments (e.g., an Env class with pointers to enclosing scopes), forming a scope chain without requiring dynamic resizing. Once compilation completes, these tables remain immutable, with no modifications allowed at runtime to support batch processing and optimize for static languages.
Insertion occurs when declaration nodes are encountered in the AST, adding the identifier and attributes like type or storage class to the current scope's structure, often in constant expected time via hashing. Lookups traverse the scope chain, using linear search for small arrays or hashing algorithms such as the djb2 function for string identifiers, which computes a hash value through iterative multiplication and addition to map names to table slots. Space optimizations include compact bit fields to encode attributes like visibility flags, reducing memory footprint in resource-constrained environments.
These implementations offer fast access times, achieving an average-case lookup complexity of O(1)O(1)O(1) with effective hashing in batch compilation scenarios, making them suitable for efficient static analysis. However, their fixed nature limits flexibility for dynamic languages that require runtime modifications, potentially leading to higher upfront memory use during deep nesting without adaptive resizing.

Dynamic Implementation

Dynamic symbol tables are constructed and maintained during program execution, contrasting with static approaches by allowing incremental updates as code is interpreted or just-in-time compiled. This enables support for late binding, where symbol resolutions occur at runtime, facilitating features such as dynamic loading and reflection in languages like Java, where the reflection API queries and modifies class metadata on the fly. In interpreters, such as Python's CPython, the symbol table is constructed during compilation to bytecode, while name resolution and binding occur progressively during execution, mapping identifiers to objects as assignments and definitions are encountered.
Common data structures for dynamic symbol tables include a stack of hash tables or dictionaries, where each activation recordcorresponding to a function call or blockholds a local table for its scope, while global symbols reside in a persistent top-level dictionary. Upon entering a new scope, such as a function invocation, the local table may be cloned from the enclosing environment to isolate variables, preventing unintended modifications across calls. This stack-based organization mirrors the runtime call stack, ensuring efficient access to nested scopes without global searches. For languages supporting first-class functions, like those with closures in JavaScript or Python, the structure incorporates environment pointers that capture outer scopes, preserving bindings beyond the lifetime of the creating activation record.
Key algorithms revolve around stack manipulation for scope lifecycle management: pushing a new empty or initialized table onto the stack when entering a scope, inserting key-value pairs (e.g., variable names to their values or descriptors) into the current top table, and performing lookups by traversing the stack from top to bottom until a match is found, following rules like Python's LEGB (Local, Enclosing, Global, Builtins) resolution. Scope exit triggers popping the top table, discarding local bindings. To optimize resolution in deep nesting, some implementations employ lazy evaluation, deferring full lookups until access is needed, or use displaysarrays of direct pointers to active scopesfor constant-time access to enclosing levels. Handling closures involves copying or referencing the relevant enclosing table into the closure's environment during creation.
Challenges in dynamic symbol table management include the computational overhead of frequent insertions, deletions, and lookups during execution, which can degrade performance in hot code paths compared to precomputed static tables. In multithreaded environments, such as concurrent interpreters, atomic operations or locks are essential to synchronize access, preventing data races when multiple threads modify shared globals. Memory consumption arises from cloning environments for recursion or closures, though mitigated by techniques like copy-on-write. For scalability, balanced binary search trees (e.g., red-black trees) offer O(log n) time complexity for insertions and searches, providing a trade-off between hash table amortization and worst-case guarantees in variable-heavy programs.

Practical Applications

In Compilation Processes

Symbol tables play a central role in the multi-phase compilation pipeline, particularly from lexical analysis through code generation, by maintaining structured information about program identifiers to ensure semantic correctness and facilitate subsequent transformations. In semantic analysis, symbol tables are essential for type inference, where they store attributes such as data types and scopes to verify compatibility during expression evaluation and declaration processing. For instance, they enable detection of errors like undeclared variables by performing lookups against current scope entries, preventing invalid references from propagating. This integration supports static checks that go beyond syntax, enforcing language rules like type consistency before intermediate code is generated.
During optimization phases, symbol tables contribute to techniques such as dead code elimination by tracking symbol usage and liveness, allowing the compiler to identify and remove unreferenced definitions that have no effect on program output. They provide data-flow information, such as reaching definitions, which informs analyses like constant propagation and redundancy elimination, thereby improving code efficiency without altering semantics. In alias analysis, symbol tables help disambiguate memory references by associating attributes like storage classes, enabling more precise optimizations across procedures. These capabilities are particularly valuable in middle-end passes, where interprocedural insights from symbol attributes can limit pointer aliasing and support transformations like loop invariant code motion.
The workflow of symbol tables aligns with the compiler's front-end, middle-end, and back-end structure. In the front-end, during parsing and semantic analysis, the table is populated incrementally with entries for identifiers encountered in declarations, including attributes like types and scopes, often using stack-based management for nested blocks. The middle-end queries these entries for optimization, such as alias analysis, leveraging the table's scope hierarchy to resolve references accurately. In the back-end, symbol tables are exported to object files, for example, as sections in the ELF format containing symbol names, types, and relocation information to support linking and loading. This phased interaction ensures seamless information flow, with the table serving as a persistent repository updated across passes.
Error handling relies on symbol table metadata to report issues precisely during compilation. For example, type mismatches trigger warnings by comparing stored attributes against usage contexts, such as assigning an integer to a floating-point variable, with location details derived from entry records. In single-pass compilers, support for forward references is achieved by inserting tentative entries upon first use, allowing later declarations to resolve them without multiple scans, though this requires careful scope management to avoid ambiguities. These mechanisms enable early detection of semantic errors, improving compilation reliability.
In specific compilers, symbol tables enhance targeted features; for instance, in GCC since its 1987 inception, they facilitate inline expansion by tracking function attributes and call sites during optimization, enabling the inliner to substitute bodies while preserving type and scope integrity. Similarly, in modern optimizers like LLVM, symbol tables underpin whole-program analysis by providing global visibility into identifier properties across modules, supporting advanced passes such as link-time optimization for interprocedural dead code removal and alias resolution.

In Runtime Environments

In runtime environments, symbol tables facilitate real-time lookups for variable access during program execution, particularly in interpreters where dynamic scoping and evaluation are common. For instance, in JavaScript engines like Google's V8, introduced in 2008, the runtime maintains environment records that function analogously to symbol tables, enabling efficient resolution of identifiers within lexical scopes during interpretation or just-in-time compilation phases. These structures support operations such as variable binding and lookup, ensuring that references to functions, objects, and primitives are resolved at execution time without recompilation. Additionally, interpreters leverage symbol tables to handle dynamic code insertion, as seen in the eval() function, which evaluates string-based expressions by updating the current execution context's symbol mappings to incorporate newly defined variables or overrides. In Python's interpreter, for example, eval() integrates with the caller's global and local namespaceseffectively the runtime symbol tableto resolve and execute dynamic expressions securely within the existing scope.
Debugger integration relies heavily on symbol tables to map runtime memory addresses back to source-level symbols, enabling features like breakpoints and stack traces. Tools such as the GNU Debugger (GDB) parse symbol tables from debug information formats like DWARF or STABS embedded in executables, allowing users to set breakpoints at specific function or line symbols rather than raw addresses. During execution, when a breakpoint is hit or a stack trace is requested, GDB consults the symbol table to translate machine addresses into meaningful names, types, and source locations, which is essential for diagnosing issues in running programs. In the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), symbol tables contribute to hot-swapping capabilities by maintaining class metadata, including method signatures and field offsets, which the JVM Tools Interface (JVMTI) uses to validate and apply live updates to loaded classes without restarting the application. This allows developers to change the bodies of existing methods during debugging sessions, though the JVMTI class redefinition mechanism prohibits structural changes such as adding or removing methods or fields, with the runtime resolving symbol conflicts to ensure compatibility.
Dynamic linkers employ symbol tables to resolve undefined references at load-time, particularly through formats like the Executable and Linkable Format (ELF) used in Unix-like systems. The ELF dynamic section references the .dynsym symbol table, which the linker (e.g., ld.so on Linux) scans to match undefined symbols in the executable with definitions in shared libraries, populating the Global Offset Table (GOT) with resolved addresses before transferring control to the program. This process occurs as part of program initialization, ensuring all necessary external symbols are bound prior to entry point execution. For lazy loading in shared libraries, the Procedure Linkage Table (PLT) defers symbol resolution until first use, where an unresolved stub in the PLT triggers a lookup in the dynamic symbol table, updating the GOT entry only when the symbol is invoked to optimize startup time and memory usage.
Emerging uses of symbol tables extend to modern runtime environments like WebAssembly (Wasm), standardized in 2017, where import tables serve as symbol resolution mechanisms for module interdependencies. A Wasm module declares imports in its import section, including functions, tables, memories, and globals from host environments or other modules; at instantiation, the runtime resolves these symbols by linking imported items to concrete implementations, enabling composable and secure execution across language boundaries. In containerized environments such as Docker, symbol resolution follows standard dynamic linking semantics via ld.so, but container isolation requires explicit configuration of library paths (e.g., via LD_LIBRARY_PATH) to ensure the runtime linker locates shared objects within the container's filesystem, preventing failures in symbol binding for multi-stage builds or microservices. This addresses challenges in distributed systems by maintaining symbol table integrity across isolated namespaces.

Illustrative Examples

Basic Programming Example

To illustrate the core function of a symbol table, consider the following simple C-like program featuring a global variable and a local variable within a function:
int global_var;

void func() {
 int local_var;
 // Example reference: global_var = 10; (resolves to global scope)
}
The symbol table is populated during the compilation process, typically after lexical and syntax analysis, to record identifiers and their attributes. In this case, processing begins with the global scope. The declaration int global_var; adds an entry for global_var with type int, scope global, an assigned memory address (e.g., 0x1000 for illustration), and an initial value of uninitialized. Next, entering the func scope via void func() pushes a new local table layer. The declaration int local_var; adds an entry for local_var with type int, scope func, and a stack offset (e.g., 8 bytes from the frame pointer). Upon exiting the function, the local scope is popped, retaining the global entry. This step-by-step construction ensures efficient storage and retrieval of symbol information.
The resulting symbol table can be represented as follows, showing active entries after full population (with values uninitialized for undeclared assignments):
NameTypeScopeValue
global_varintglobaluninitialized
local_varintfuncuninitialized
A lookup demonstration occurs when resolving references within func. For instance, accessing global_var (as in global_var = 10;) searches the current local scope first but finds no match for global_var, then proceeds outward to the global scope, retrieving its entry without shadowing issues since no local variable shares the name. This hierarchical resolution maintains correct visibility rules across scopes.

Advanced System Examples

In the System V Application Binary Interface (ABI), introduced as part of UNIX System V Release 4 in 1988, the .symtab section of ELF files serves as the primary symbol table for object files and executables. This section contains an array of symbol table entries, each structured as an Elf64_Sym (or Elf32_Sym for 32-bit) record, which includes fields such as st_name (an index into the associated string table for the symbol's name), st_value (the symbol's value, typically an address or offset), and st_size (the size of the object in bytes). These symbols facilitate both static linking during compilation and dynamic linking at runtime by providing relocation information for undefined references.
Python's implementation of symbol tables is deeply integrated into its code objects, which represent compiled bytecode for functions and modules. Each code object includes attributes such as co_varnames (local variable names), co_names (names of globals and other identifiers), co_cellvars (cell variables for closures), and co_freevars (free variables), which store the necessary symbol information for bytecode interpretation and scope resolution. To support closuresfunctions that capture variables from enclosing scopesPython uses co_cellvars for variables that are both assigned and referenced across scopes (treated as cells for mutable binding) and co_freevars for variables referenced but not assigned in the inner scope. The introduction of the nonlocal statement in Python 3.0 (released December 2008) improved closure handling by allowing direct assignment to variables in enclosing scopes, refining the semantics for nested functions.
In Linux ELF loaders, symbol tables enable runtime dynamism through mechanisms like dlopen(), which loads shared objects and updates symbol resolutions on-the-fly. The dynamic symbol table (.dynsym) provides a subset of symbols visible to the runtime linker (ld.so), which resolves addresses via indirection in the Global Offset Table (GOT) and Procedure Linkage Table (PLT); the PLT stubs initially point to lazy-binding resolvers, while the GOT holds final resolved pointers after symbol lookup. This setup allows incremental loading of libraries without restarting the process, contrasting with static tables by permitting address relocations post-execution start.
These examples highlight a key distinction: the SysV ABI's .symtab emphasizes static symbol resolution for link-time efficiency in compiled binaries, whereas Python's code-object approach supports interpretive dynamism with flexible scope handling for high-level scripting, and Linux ELF loaders extend this to runtime adaptability via dlopen and GOT/PLT for modular system libraries.

References

5.0 Semantic Analysis Symbol Tables

4.4 Symbol Tables - Computer Science: An Interdisciplinary Approach

Symbol Tables and Static Checks - cs.wisc.edu

 Lecture 3 - The Symbol Table - Compiler Construction

 Building Your Compiler: The Symbol Table

 Symbol Tables - cs.Princeton

why symbol table is required for debugging - c++ - Stack Overflow

Symbol Table Section - Linker and Libraries Guide

3.1 Elementary Symbol Tables - Algorithms, 4th Edition

 CASE SOAP III : symbolic optimum assembly program for the IBM ...

PROGRAMMING SYSTEMS AND LANGUAGES - ACM Digital Library

 History of Compilers - cs.wisc.edu

 Symbol Tables & Scoping Block Structured Languages - cs.wisc.edu

Some Thoughts on Writing a Pascal Compiler

Virtual Memory, Processes, and Sharing in Multics

A Retargetable JIT Compiler for Java - ResearchGate

Python 0.9.1 part 01/21 - Minnie.tuhs.org

On the structure of dictionaries for compilers | ACM SIGPLAN Notices

Symbol Table in Compiler - GeeksforGeeks

Compiler Design - Symbol Table - Tutorials Point

 Symbol Tables

What is symbol table's attributes and scopes in Compiler Design?

 Design and Implementation of the Symbol Table for Object - NADIA

 Scoping and Symbol Tables - Anoop Sarkar

 Imperative Languages: Names, Scoping, and Bindings - NYU

 Scope & Symbol Table

Namespaces (C++) - Microsoft Learn

 Dragon-book.pdf - School of Information Science and Technology

Hash Functions

4. Execution model

 CS143 Lecture 9

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/executionmodel.html#free-variables

https://docs.python.org/3/reference/executionmodel.html#resolution-of-names

Symbol Table Management - Compiler Design - Meegle

 Lecture 8: Scope, Symbol Table, & Runtime Stack

 Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools

 Reading Assignment Symbol Tables in CSX CSX Allows no Forward ...

24.2 LTO file sections - GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection

 LLVM: A Compilation Framework for Lifelong Program Analysis ...

Python eval(): Evaluate Expressions Dynamically

Symbols (Debugging with GDB) - Sourceware

Debugging with GDB - Examining Data

JVM Internals - James D Bloom - Blog

Java HotSwap Guide | JRebel by Perforce

 Tool Interface Standard (TIS) Executable and Linking Format (ELF ...

 The inside story on shared libraries and dynamic loading - UCSD CSE

ld.so(8) - Linux manual page - man7.org

Debug Shared Libraries Loading using LD_DEBUG on Linux | Lindevs
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion