Termux Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 4 days ago 
Termux
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Termux is a free and open-source terminal emulator and Linux environment application for Android devices. Current versions require Android 7.0 or later, while legacy "apt-android-5" APK variants provide limited support for Android 5.0 and 6.0 devices (with frozen repositories, no planned package updates, and restricted functionality). Android 4.4 and earlier versions are not supported. It enables users to run a command-line interface and Linux packages directly on their phones or tablets without requiring root access or any additional setup. It installs a minimal base system automatically upon first use, providing access to essential tools like the Bash and Zsh shells, along with a package manager based on APT for installing and managing a wide range of additional software.
Key features of Termux include powerful terminal emulation that supports accurate rendering of Linux commands, secure remote access to servers and to Termux itself via OpenSSH (for example, using Tailscale for secure connections over a private mesh VPN without port forwarding or root access), networking capabilities using standard Linux command-line tools such as Nmap for network scanning, curl and wget for HTTP requests and file downloads, ping for connectivity testing, ip for viewing network interfaces, and nslookup for DNS lookups, and compatibility with editors such as nano, Emacs, and Vim for file management. Users can install and run programming languages and tools like Python, Node.js, Git, curl, and rsync, as well as compile code in languages including C, Go, Rust, and Swift using built-in compilers like Clang. Termux is also widely used in the ethical hacking and penetration testing community, supporting the installation of specialized security tools such as Nmap (for network scanning and reconnaissance), Hydra (for password brute-forcing), sqlmap (for automated SQL injection testing), and Metasploit (an exploitation framework that may require enabling the unstable repository via pkg install unstable-repo). These capabilities enable users to perform security assessments and penetration testing on Android devices without root access, though such tools must always be used ethically, legally, and with explicit permission from authorized parties. The application is highly customizable and portable, supporting external keyboards, Bluetooth devices, full mouse input, and external displays. With compatible hardwaresuch as USB-C ports supporting DisplayPort Alt Mode for video output or Samsung DeX-enabled devicesusers can connect an external monitor, keyboard, and mouse to create a desktop-like setup. By installing a Linux distribution (e.g., Debian or Ubuntu) via proot-distro, a desktop environment (e.g., XFCE), and displaying it via Termux:X11 (preferred over VNC for better performance), Termux enables the Android device to function as a Linux desktop dock station. Not all devices support video output over USB-C.
Developed as an open-source project hosted on GitHub, Termux is maintained by a community of contributors. As of March 2026, the official Termux installation guide recommends installing the app from F-Droid (via the F-Droid client or website), and Google Play versions are deprecated. Add-ons should also be installed from F-Droid. The app is available from F-Droid for stable releases and from GitHub for the latest versions (including legacy apt-android-5 variants for Android 5.0-6.0 devices), with the latest stable release v0.118.3 and beta release v0.119.0-beta.3, both released on May 22, 2025.
As of March 2026, the project remains actively maintained with recent commits to the termux-app repository in January 2026 and to the termux-packages repository in February 2026, ongoing package updates, and continues to be available via F-Droid; the project is seeking maintainers for the Android app. The project emphasizes security and extensibility, with separate repositories for the core app, shared libraries, and package repositories, and it has received support from initiatives like the GitHub Accelerator and NLnet's NGI Mobifree program. While compatible with most modern Android versions, it may encounter limitations on Android 12 and above due to OS-imposed process restrictions.

Overview

Description and Purpose

Termux is a free and open-source terminal emulator application for Android devices that provides a Linux-like environment, enabling users to install packages and execute command-line utilities ported from Linux distributions. It simulates a minimal Linux system directly on Android, allowing access to tools such as shells (bash and zsh), text editors (nano and vim), and programming languages such as Python, Node.js, Ruby, and Go, which can be installed using commands like pkg install python nodejs ruby go, without the need for a full desktop operating system. It also supports Git for version control, installable via pkg install git, and enables running scripts directly on the device.
The primary purpose of Termux is to empower developers, system administrators, and technology enthusiasts to perform mobile-based computing tasks, including software development, remote server management, and file system operations, by replicating the Linux command-line interface on portable hardware. This facilitates on-the-go productivity, such as scripting, compiling code, or managing data, in a lightweight package that integrates with Android's ecosystem. Although its command-line interface may present a steeper learning curve for users unfamiliar with terminal environments, Termux provides versatile capabilities for backend development, scripting, and other computing tasks, with support for offline operation once packages are installed.
Termux is released under the GNU General Public License version 3 (GPLv3), with some components under the Apache 2.0 license, ensuring its open-source nature and community-driven development. As of March 2026, the official Termux installation guide recommends installing the app from F-Droid, with Google Play versions deprecated. It is distributed through F-Droid for stable open-source builds and GitHub for the latest APKs (version 0.119 or higher recommended).
A key distinguishing feature of Termux is its operation entirely in user space, requiring no root access to the device, as it leverages Android's native APIs for file storage, permissions, and process management to create a contained Linux environment. This design prioritizes security and ease of use, making advanced command-line functionalities accessible on stock Android devices without compromising system integrity.

Core Features

Termux provides a minimal base system upon installation, which includes essential command-line tools such as the Bash shell, coreutils for basic file and text manipulation, and the nano text editor, enabling users to immediately execute standard Linux commands in a lightweight environment. This setup mimics a basic Unix-like system without requiring additional configuration, focusing on core utilities to support scripting, file management, and simple editing tasks directly on Android devices.
For storage access, Termux utilizes Android's scoped storage model, placing the $HOME directory within the app's private data space at /data/data/com.termux/files/home, which allows full read-write permissions including support for chmod, chown, and executable files. To access shared or external storage, users run the termux-setup-storage command, which grants necessary permissions and creates symlinks in ~/storage to directories such as ~/storage/downloads linking to /storage/emulated/0/Download (the standard shared Download folder on Android, including Xiaomi devices, with no specific variations). Additional symlinks provide access to other shared directories and external SD cards, though external storage is generally read-only except in app-private areas.
Hardware integration in Termux supports external Bluetooth keyboards for efficient input, full mouse functionality for pointer-based navigation, and external displays for expanded workspaces, while built-in touch gestures facilitate session switching and basic controls without rooting the device. These features ensure compatibility with peripherals, enhancing productivity in a mobile Linux context.
Termux enables multi-session support, allowing users to run multiple independent terminal instances simultaneously from the navigation drawer, each maintaining its own working directory and processes for tasks like parallel scripting or monitoring. This capability prevents interference between sessions, supporting efficient multitasking within the app.
Operating without root privileges, Termux leverages PRoot, a user-space implementation of chroot, mount --bind, and binfmt_misc, to simulate root environments. For executing binaries of non-native CPU architectures, users can employ QEMU user-mode emulation optionally. PRoot intercepts system calls to fake filesystem and process isolation, providing a secure, non-privileged Linux-like execution space that avoids kernel modifications or device rooting.

History

Origins and Early Development

Termux was developed by Fredrik Fornwall starting in 2015 as an open-source project to bring Linux terminal functionality to Android devices. Fornwall led the initial efforts to create a terminal emulator that would allow users to run Linux commands and environments directly on non-rooted Android phones and tablets, addressing the limitations of mobile operating systems for command-line work. The project was hosted on GitHub under the termux organization, where early code focused on core terminal emulation and shell integration.
The first version of Termux was released on the Google Play Store in 2015, introducing basic terminal emulation capabilities such as support for bash and zsh shells. This initial release emphasized simplicity, enabling users to execute standard Linux utilities without additional setup or hardware modifications. By providing access to a minimal Linux environment, Termux filled a gap for developers seeking portable tools on Android.
Termux's motivations centered on offering a lightweight alternative to rooted environments, which often involved security risks and warranty voids, while targeting Android's expanding developer community interested in scripting, automation, and mobile-based computing. The app's no-root approach quickly appealed to users wanting command-line tools like editors and package managers on the go. Early adoption was driven by its ease of use and focus on essential command-line operations, attracting hobbyists and professionals alike in the years following its launch.

Major Updates and Milestones

Following the release of version 0.83 in November 2019, support for Android 5 and 6 was dropped effective January 2020, aligning with evolving Android security restrictions that limited compatibility for older versions. Later that year, updates via Google Play were halted after version 0.101 in September, due to policy conflicts with Android 10's scoped storage and executable restrictions, prompting users to seek alternative distribution channels. This marked a pivotal shift, as the project could no longer maintain official Play Store presence without compromising core functionality.
The following year, the shutdown of JFrog's Bintray service on May 1, 2021, disrupted Termux's package repositories, which had relied on it for hosting. The team swiftly migrated to Hetzner-hosted mirrors under the termux.net domain, ensuring continuity for package distribution and restoring access within weeks. This transition highlighted the project's resilience amid third-party service dependencies.
A key early milestone was the introduction of Termux:API in 2017, which provided command-line access to Android hardware features like GPS, SMS, and sensors through a companion app and package, enabling advanced scripting and integration. Community efforts have since expanded repositories, adding specialized ones for root access, X11 graphics, and API extensions, broadening Termux's ecosystem without central oversight.
In June 2024, Termux returned to the Google Play Store as an experimental build compatible with Android 11 and later devices. Later that year, version 0.118.1, released on June 18, 2024, incorporated bootstrap improvements, while subsequent releases addressed permission and storage APIs for ongoing platform compatibility. The stable version 0.118.3 followed on May 22, 2025, refining build configurations and MIME handling for better integration. Later in 2025, beta releases such as v0.119.0-beta.3 in May continued enhancements. On February 11, 2026, version 2026.02.11 was released on Google Play, introducing built-in support for additional Termux:API methods (e.g., termux-camera-info, termux-notification, termux-tts-speak) and updates to bootstrap packages. This version requires Android 11 or higher. However, as of March 2026, the official Termux installation guide deprecates Google Play versions and recommends installing from F-Droid instead. These developments, driven by community contributions, solidified Termux's role in mobile Linux environments.

Installation and Setup

Acquisition Methods

Termux is primarily acquired through official open-source channels to ensure access to the latest features and security updates. The recommended source for stable releases is F-Droid, where the universal APK can be downloaded directly without requiring the F-Droid app, or installed via the F-Droid client. Development versions and nightly builds are available on the project's GitHub releases page, providing architecture-specific or universal APKs.
As of March 2026, the official Termux installation guide states that Google Play versions are deprecated and recommends installing from F-Droid (via the client or website) for stable releases and full features without restrictions imposed by Google Play policies. Add-ons should also be acquired from F-Droid. For detailed installation steps, refer to the standard guide on the Termux Wiki at https://wiki.termux.dev/wiki/Installation or https://wiki.termux.com/wiki/Installation.(https://wiki.termux.dev/wiki/Installation)
The application requires Android 7.0 (API level 24) or higher for full support of both the app and its packages, including ongoing updates. For devices running Android 5.0 to 6.0, limited legacy support is available through "apt-android-5" APK variants from the official GitHub releases (for versions >=0.118.0) or build actions. These variants are available as universal or architecture-specific (e.g., armeabi-v7a for older devices). These legacy versions provide limited functionality, as no package updates are supported. Android 4.4 is not supported. Downloads should only be made from official sources such as GitHub or F-Droid to avoid malware from unofficial sources. It supports ARM (armeabi-v7a, arm64-v8a) and x86 (x86, x86_64) architectures via universal or split APKs, with an initial storage footprint of approximately 180 MB for the universal variant, expanding with installed packages. At least 300 MB of free internal storage is advised to accommodate the bootstrap process and initial setup.
To install, download the APK from the chosen source, enable "Install unknown apps" in Android settings for the browser or file manager used, then tap the APK file to proceed with installation via the system's package installer. Upon first launch, Termux automatically bootstraps a minimal Linux environment by extracting essential files, requiring an internet connection for this one-time process. If switching sources, uninstall any prior Termux installations to avoid signature conflicts. Post-installation, further configuration such as granting storage permissions is detailed in the Initial Configuration section.
For integrity verification, especially with GitHub downloads, compute the SHA-256 hash of the APK file and compare it against values provided in release assets if available, or validate the APK signature against the official test key's SHA-256 fingerprint: B6:DA:01:48:0E:EF:D5:FB:F2:CD:37:71:B8:D1:02:1E:C7:91:30:4B:DD:6C:4B:F4:1D:3F:AA:BA:D4:8E:E5:E1. Tools like Android's APK Signature Verification or third-party apps can assist in this step to confirm the file has not been tampered with.

F-Droid zerinden Termux Kurulumu Adm Adm (Trke)

F-Droid istemcisini indirin: Taraycnzdan https://f-droid.org adresine gidin, "F-Droid.apk" dosyasn indirin.

ndirilen APK'yi an, Android ayarlarndan "Bilinmeyen kaynaklardan ykleme" iznini etkinletirin ve F-Droid'i kurun.

F-Droid uygulamasn an, arama ubuuna "Termux" yazn.

"Termux" (paket ad: com.termux, gelitirici: Fredrik Fornwall) uygulamasn bulun ve "Kur" butonuna basn.

Kurulum tamamlandktan sonra Termux'u an; ilk seferde temel sistem otomatik indirilir (bekleyin).

Termux'ta paketleri gncellemek iin: pkg update && pkg upgrade komutlarn altrn (istee bal ama nerilir).

Not: F-Droid zerinden kurulum, otomatik gncellemeler ve gvenlik iin nerilir. Google Play srm yerine bunu kullann.

Initial Configuration

Upon launching Termux for the first time after installation, users should enable Android Developer Options if planning advanced development tasks such as wireless debugging or using ADB to connect to a PC. Navigate to Settings About phone and tap the Build number entry 7 times to unlock Developer Options, which provides features like wireless debugging and stay-awake settings for improved productivity during coding sessions.
Users must then grant necessary permissions to enable full functionality, particularly for accessing device storage. To allow Termux to read and write files outside its private directory, execute the command termux-setup-storage in the terminal; this prompts Android to request permission for accessing photos, media, and files on the device. The shared Download folder on Android devices, including Xiaomi (MIUI), is located at /storage/emulated/0/Download. After running the command, it becomes accessible via the symlink ~/storage/downloads (or $HOME/storage/downloads). Note that this is the standard path across most Android devices, with no Xiaomi-specific variations commonly documented. If the permission prompt does not appear or access is denied, navigate to Android Settings > Apps > Termux > Permissions, revoke the storage permission, then re-grant it and rerun the command.
Following permission setup, the initial boot process involves updating the package repository and upgrading installed packages to ensure compatibility and security. Run pkg update && pkg upgrade to refresh the package lists and apply updates; this step is recommended before installing any additional software to avoid conflicts. To prepare a coding environment, install essential development tools such as git, python, nodejs, clang, vim, nano, and openssh using pkg install git python nodejs clang vim nano openssh. These provide foundational utilities for version control, scripting in multiple languages, code editing, and remote access. Additional tools like wget can also be installed as needed.
Termux operates within a prefixed environment where the root filesystem is isolated at $PREFIX, defined as /data/data/com.termux/files/usr, separating it from the Android system while mimicking a Linux directory structure. The home directory is located at /data/data/com.termux/files/home. To personalize the shell experience, users can configure the .bashrc file by editing it with a text editor like nano ~/.bashrc and adding aliases, such as alias ll='ls -l' for a detailed directory listing; changes take effect after running source ~/.bashrc or restarting the session.
Common initial issues may arise, such as keyboard input delays where text only appears after pressing space, often due to incompatible input methods. To resolve this, create the configuration directory with mkdir -p ~/.termux, then add enforce-char-based-input = true to ~/.termux/termux.properties using a text editor, and restart Termux. Session crashes, particularly on Android 12 and later due to process termination policies, can be addressed by accessing the failsafe shell: swipe right to open the drawer, long-press "New Session," and select "Failsafe," or long-press the Termux app icon and choose the failsafe option to recover a broken environment.

Community-Developed Setup Scripts

No official comprehensive "complete setup script" is provided by the Termux developers for 2025 or 2026. However, community-developed scripts hosted on GitHub automate various aspects of Termux configuration beyond basic manual steps, including installing packages, setting up Zsh with themes and plugins, adding syntax highlighting, and applying optimizations.
One example is the script from Srinath10X/termux-setup, last updated in August 2025, which configures Oh My Zsh, adds themes, installs tools like pfetch for system information display, and handles other customizations. It can be executed via a one-liner:
bash -c "$(curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Srinath10X/termux-setup/main/install.sh)"

Recent guides recommend combining manual configuration steps with community styling tools for enhanced personalization. For instance, a December 2025 How-To Geek article outlines essential setup tasks and suggests using the termux-style script to change color schemes and fonts:
git clone https://github.com/adi1090x/termux-style && cd termux-style && ./install

Users should exercise caution with third-party scripts downloaded from the internet, as they may execute arbitrary code. Reviewing the source code before running is recommended to ensure security.

User Interface and Interaction

Terminal Emulation

Termux simulates a Linux terminal by emulating standard terminal behaviors within the Android environment, enabling users to interact with a command-line interface as they would on a desktop Linux system. It sets the TERM environment variable to xterm-256color by default, which provides compatibility with applications expecting extended color support and precise control over terminal operations. This emulation includes full handling of ANSI escape sequences, allowing for dynamic text coloring with up to 256 colors, cursor positioning, and other formatting controls such as bold, underline, and blink effects.
Input in Termux is facilitated through an on-screen keyboard optimized for touch devices, incorporating volume buttons for modifier keys to mimic physical keyboard functionality. The Volume Down button emulates Ctrl (e.g., Volume Down + L sends Ctrl + L to clear the screen), while Volume Up handles special keys like Escape (Volume Up + E) and Tab (Volume Up + T). An extra keys view, featuring dedicated buttons for Ctrl, Alt, Esc, and arrows, can be toggled via a long press on the keyboard icon or the Volume Up + Q shortcut. Swipe gestures enhance navigation: swiping up on certain extra keys triggers pop-up alternatives, and swiping left on the extra keys row activates a text input view supporting autocorrect and suggestions for complex entry.
Output rendering occurs in a full-screen terminal view that prioritizes readability on mobile screens, with native support for UTF-8 encoding to display international characters and emojis without corruption. Line wrapping is handled automatically to prevent horizontal overflow, adjusting to the device's screen dimensions and orientation for seamless text flow. This ensures that long command outputs or logs remain legible without manual scrolling.
Session management in Termux allows multiple independent terminal instances to run concurrently, accessible via the navigation drawer opened by swiping from the left edge. Users can create new sessions by tapping the "New Session" button, with a long press on the button prompting for a custom name or a fail-safe session that persists even if the main app crashes. Sessions can be detached by closing the terminal view and reattached by selecting them from the drawer list; integration with tmux further enhances this by enabling advanced multiplexing, where users can detach from and reattach to tmux sessions within Termux for persistent workflows across app restarts.

Customization and Controls

Termux allows users to personalize the terminal's appearance and interaction through configuration files and optional add-ons, enabling adjustments to visual elements and input methods for improved usability on Android devices. The primary method involves editing the ~/.termux/termux.properties file, which uses a simple key-value syntax to modify settings such as key bindings and layout options; changes take effect after running the termux-reload-settings command. For advanced theming, the Termux:Styling add-on extends these capabilities by providing access to predefined color schemes and fonts, as detailed in the official add-ons section.
Theme customization primarily relies on the Termux:Styling add-on, which offers a selection of color schemes to alter foreground, background, and accent colors in the terminal, stored in ~/.termux/colors.properties. Users can adjust font sizes for better readability and apply powerline-ready fonts by placing a custom font.ttf file in ~/.termux/, supporting scalability across different screen sizes. High-contrast modes are facilitated by selecting or creating color schemes with stark foreground-background contrasts, enhancing accessibility for users with visual impairments. Community-developed scripts provide additional options for terminal customization, complementing official methods like the Termux:Styling add-on and manual termux.properties edits. For example, the termux-style script offers an interactive way to apply a large collection of color schemes (over 90) and powerline-patched fonts (20 included). It can be installed and run with: git clone https://github.com/adi1090x/termux-style && cd termux-style && ./install.
Key bindings can be tailored via termux.properties to remap shortcuts for session management, such as setting shortcut.create-session = ctrl + t for opening new sessions or back-key = escape to send an Escape signal on the back button press. Volume keys serve as hardware modifiers by default, with Volume Down emulating Ctrl (e.g., Volume Down + C for Ctrl+C) and Volume Up for Alt or other functions like Escape (Volume Up + E), providing efficient input without on-screen clutter. These bindings can be fine-tuned to accommodate personal workflows, such as redefining navigation or command shortcuts.
Layout adjustments include toggling the extra keys row, controlled by the extra-keys-style property (options: default, arrows-only, all, or none to disable it entirely), which displays customizable on-screen keys like Ctrl, Alt, arrows, and Tab in a configurable array format under extra-keys. Margins can be set with terminal-margin-horizontal and terminal-margin-vertical for precise screen utilization, while fullscreen mode via fullscreen = true maximizes the viewable area. Bell notifications are customizable through bell-character, with options for vibration (vibrate), audible beep (beep), or ignoring (ignore), integrating haptic feedback for alerts without disrupting focus. These features ensure adaptable layouts suitable for various device orientations and user preferences.

Package Management

APT-Based System

Termux utilizes an APT-based package management system modeled after Debian and Ubuntu, employing the APT (Advanced Package Tool) and dpkg utilities to facilitate the installation, upgrade, and removal of software packages. This setup allows users to manage a Linux-like environment directly on Android devices, handling dependencies and configurations in a manner consistent with traditional Debian-derived systems.
Central to this system is the pkg command, a user-friendly wrapper around APT designed to simplify interactions by providing shortcutssuch as pkg in as an alias for pkg installand automating routine tasks like updating package lists before installations to ensure the latest metadata is available. The pkg wrapper also intelligently balances load across repository mirrors to prevent quota issues from individual hosts, enhancing reliability during package operations. All packages are distributed in .deb format, specifically cross-compiled for Android's architecture to maintain compatibility with the host device's runtime environment, distinguishing them from standard Debian repositories due to inherent differences in system libraries and binaries.
Key commands enable efficient package handling: pkg search <query> scans available packages by name or description; pkg install <package> downloads and installs the specified package along with its dependencies, which are resolved automatically without manual interventionfor instance, users can install programming languages such as Python, Node.js, and Ruby using pkg install python nodejs ruby, which automatically handles dependencies for these coding tools; and pkg uninstall <package> removes the package while retaining associated configuration files for potential reuse (full removal, including configs, requires direct APT commands like apt purge). Similarly, for version control, users can install Git with pkg install git and then clone a GitHub repository by running cd $HOME; git clone <repository-url>; cd <repository-folder>, assuming Git is installed via APT. Similarly, for handling RAR archives, users can install the non-free unrar package with pkg install unrar to enable extraction of RAR files. After installation, users navigate to the directory containing the RAR filepotentially requiring termux-setup-storage for access to shared storageand extract using unrar x filename.rar to preserve full directory structures or unrar e filename.rar to extract files without paths. Note that creating RAR files is not supported due to proprietary licensing restrictions on the RAR format. This automatic dependency resolution streamlines workflows, reducing errors common in manual installations on resource-constrained mobile platforms.
The update process follows a structured cycle to keep the system current: pkg update fetches and refreshes repository metadata from official sources, ensuring users have access to the most recent package information; subsequently, pkg upgrade applies updates to all installed packages, addressing security patches and feature enhancements. Developers recommend performing these updates weekly to mitigate compatibility issues and maintain optimal performance.
Note that to manage storage effectively, users should periodically run pkg clean or apt clean to clear the APT package cache, which can accumulate and contribute to increased storage usage over time.
Binary compatibility is achieved by compiling packages with the Android Native Development Kit (NDK), which adapts Linux software to Android's Bionic libc and architecture-specific constraints, such as supporting only one architecture (e.g., aarch64 for 64-bit ARM) per Termux installation. This approach enables seamless execution of native binaries without requiring root access or full emulation overhead.
Through its APT-based infrastructure, Termux provides a robust ecosystem for programming, system administration, and utility tasks on Android.

Repositories and Packages

Termux maintains a curated set of official repositories that provide access to a specialized package ecosystem tailored for Android environments, distinct from full Linux distribution mirrors. The primary repository, known as the main or stable repository, hosts the core collection of packages and is accessible via the URL https://packages.termux.dev/apt/termux-main.(https://github.com/termux/termux-packages/wiki/Mirrors) This repository includes general-purpose software, programming languages such as C++ and Java, text editors like vim, and various utilities. Unlike traditional Linux distributions, Termux does not mirror entire distros but instead offers a selective build of compatible binaries optimized for mobile use.
Python is available through this repository, providing version 3.11 or later along with the pip package manager. To verify the installed versions, users can run python --version and pip --version in the terminal. Termux typically provides Python 3.11+ with pip 24.x+, which is modern enough for most needs. Users may encounter a "forbidden upgrade error" when attempting to self-upgrade pip using pip install --upgrade pip, as this is disabled to prevent breaking the system-managed python-pip package. Instead, upgrade via pkg upgrade.
Installing certain Python packages via pip that require on-device compilation of C extensions, such as lxml, can fail due to high RAM requirements, compilation errors with clang, and deprecation warnings in dependencies (e.g., xmlXPathInit in libxml2). In these cases, Termux provides prebuilt packages, and users should install via pkg install python-lxml instead of pip to avoid build failures.
Similar compilation challenges may occasionally occur with other packages requiring native extensions, such as those used in data science and visualization. To install popular data science libraries such as NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, and Jupyter in recent versions of Termux (2026), follow these steps after installing Python:

Update and upgrade packages (if not already done):
pkg update && pkg upgrade -y

Upgrade pip and related tools:
pip install --upgrade pip setuptools wheel

Install the packages:
pip install numpy pandas matplotlib jupyter

If compilation issues arise (rare in recent versions), install additional dependencies such as pkg install clang libjpeg-turbo freetype and others as required for the specific package. NumPy is also available as a prebuilt package in the main repository via pkg install python-numpy. For Pandas, prebuilt packages may be accessible via the third-party Termux User Repository (TUR) by running pkg install tur-repo followed by pkg install python-pandas (and python-numpy if preferred, though available in main). The pip method is simple and commonly used.
To run Jupyter Notebook after installation:
jupyter notebook --ip=127.0.0.1 --port=8888 --no-browser
Then open the displayed URL in an Android browser.
In addition to the main repository, Termux provides optional specialized repositories for extended functionality. The x11-repo focuses on graphical user interface libraries and tools, enabling X11-based applications, and requires Android 7 or later; it can be added using the command pkg install x11-repo. The root-repo supplies packages for proot-based root emulation and related utilities, added similarly with pkg install root-repo. Previously separate repositories for science and gaming packages have been merged into the main repository to streamline access, including prebuilt packages such as python-numpy for scientific computing. These official repositories are built from scripts hosted on GitHub and signed by the Termux developer team for security verification.
The repositories are hosted on Hetzner infrastructure, with the primary server migrated there in December 2022 following earlier hosting transitions. Community members maintain additional third-party repositories, but official ones remain under Termux team oversight. Users in certain regions can configure mirrors for faster downloads by selecting alternatives through Termux tools, ensuring reliable access without altering the core package distribution model.
Users may encounter package installation errors, such as "404 Not Found," when using unreliable or outdated third-party mirrors, for example, termux.mentality.rip during periods of downtime or delayed updates. To resolve these issues, first install the termux-tools package if not already present using pkg install termux-tools. Then, run termux-change-repo, select the Main repository, and choose a reliable mirror option such as Grimler (grimler.se). Finally, execute pkg update followed by pkg upgrade to refresh the package lists and apply any pending updates.
RepositoryFocusAddition MethodKey Examples
Main/StableCore utilities, languages, editorsDefault (pre-configured)C++, Java, vim, numpy
x11-repoGUI libraries and X11 toolspkg install x11-repoX11 server packages
root-repoProot and root emulation toolspkg install root-repoProot-distro utilities

Add-ons and Extensions

Official Add-ons

Termux offers several official add-on applications available through F-Droid and GitHub releases, each designed to extend the core terminal emulator's capabilities by integrating with Android's features or enhancing user interaction. These add-ons must be signed with the same key as the main Termux app to function properly and share permissions.
Termux:API provides command-line access to various Android system features, allowing users to interact with device hardware and services directly from the terminal. Key functionalities include sending and listing SMS messages, capturing photos or videos with the camera, retrieving location data via GPS, managing battery status, controlling Wi-Fi connections, accessing device sensors (via termux-sensor), displaying notifications (via termux-notification), vibrating the device (via termux-vibrate), toggling the flashlight (via termux-torch), and more. Listing SMS messages requires installing the termux-api package (pkg install termux-api) and granting SMS permissions to the Termux:API app. This add-on is particularly valuable for development workflows on mobile devices, as it enables scripts and applications to access Android hardware capabilities, supporting prototyping, testing, and integration of device-specific features such as sensor data processing or user notifications directly within Termux-based coding environments. The add-on exposes these APIs via a binary that communicates over anonymous namespace sockets, with client scripts included in the corresponding Termux package for ease of use. It requires installation alongside the main Termux app and is essential for scripts that need to leverage Android-specific capabilities. The official Termux:API APK is available from F-Droid (recommended for stable releases) at https://f-droid.org/repo/com.termux.api_1002.apk (version 0.53.0) and from GitHub releases at https://github.com/termux/termux-api/releases/download/v0.53.0/termux-api-app_v0.53.0+github.debug.apk (debug build from source). The official GitHub repository is https://github.com/termux/termux-api.(https://github.com/termux/termux-api)(https://f-droid.org/packages/com.termux.api/)(https://wiki.termux.com/wiki/Termux:API)
In the Google Play Store version 2026.02.11 (updated February 11, 2026), the main Termux app includes built-in support for additional Termux:API methods (such as termux-camera-info, termux-notification, termux-tts-speak, termux-job-scheduler, termux-media-player, termux-microphone-record, termux-speech-to-text, termux-tts-engines, and others), as well as updates to bootstrap packages. This may reduce reliance on the separate Termux:API add-on for these specific features in that build, which requires Android 11 or higher and is available at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.termux.(https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.termux)
Termux:Boot enables the automatic execution of scripts or programs immediately after the device boots up, facilitating automated startup tasks without manual intervention. Users set this up by creating a ~/.termux/boot/ directory and placing executable scripts there, which are run in lexicographical order upon boot completion. To ensure scripts continue running, it is recommended to acquire a wake lock using termux-wake-lock to prevent the device from sleeping. The add-on requires launching the app once post-installation to grant boot permissions and is particularly useful for initializing services like SSH daemons.
Termux:Widget allows users to create launcher shortcuts and home screen widgets for quickly running Termux scripts, bridging the gap between the terminal environment and Android's graphical interface. After installation, users create a ~/.shortcuts/ or ~/.shortcuts/tasks directory with appropriate permissions (0700), place scripts in it, and add the widget to the home screen, where available scripts appear as clickable icons. Features include support for foreground or background execution, custom icons for shortcuts, and dynamic shortcut updates via long-press on the app icon. This add-on streamlines access to frequently used commands, such as backups or system checks, directly from the launcher.
Termux:Float introduces a floating window mode for the Termux terminal, enabling multitasking by displaying sessions in an overlay that can be positioned anywhere on the screen without interrupting other apps. It supports customizable properties like cursor style and character-based input, configured via a ~/.termux/termux.float.properties file, and includes logging for debugging with adjustable verbosity levels. The add-on requires Termux version 0.118.0 or later for full compatibility and is installed separately, allowing users to launch floating sessions for monitoring logs or running persistent tasks alongside other activities.
Termux:Styling focuses on aesthetic and readability enhancements by permitting customization of the terminal's font and color schemes through an intuitive interface. Users access these options by long-pressing the terminal screen, selecting "More..." then "Style," and choosing from predefined or custom fonts and color palettes, which modify files like font.ttf and colors.properties in the Termux directory. This add-on ensures that visual tweaks are applied seamlessly across sessions, improving user experience for prolonged terminal use without altering core functionality.
Termux:Tasker integrates Termux with the Tasker automation app, enabling the execution of terminal commands as part of Tasker profiles or tasks for advanced device automation. It provides plugin actions in Tasker where users specify executable paths, arguments, working directories, and stdin input, supporting both foreground and background sessions with output returned via variables like %stdout and %stderr. Setup involves granting the com.termux.permission.RUN_COMMAND permission to Tasker and optionally enabling external app access in Termux properties; this allows seamless scripting for events like location-based triggers or sensor responses. Such integration supports broader automation workflows detailed in Termux's scripting capabilities.
Termux:X11 provides an X11 server implementation for running graphical Linux applications on Android devices. It enables the execution of desktop environments like XFCE and supports touch gestures for input, such as tapping for clicks and two-finger scrolling. The add-on consists of an Android app and a companion Termux package, requiring Android 8 or later. Installation involves downloading the app from GitHub releases and installing the package via pkg i x11-repo && pkg i termux-x11-nightly. It is actively maintained with nightly builds available as of 2025.

Integration with External Tools

Termux facilitates integration with external automation applications such as Tasker and Automate through its dedicated plugin, which enables the execution of Termux scripts and commands from within these GUI-based tools. This allows users to trigger complex terminal operations, like file manipulations or network tasks, directly from automation workflows without switching apps. For instance, in Tasker, users select the Termux:Tasker plugin as an action, specify the script path in the ~/.termux/tasker/ directory, and configure parameters for input/output, enabling seamless exposure of Termux's Linux environment to Android's automation ecosystem. Similarly, Automate leverages the same plugin to run Termux commands, passing arguments and capturing results for conditional logic in flows, thus enhancing productivity for tasks like scheduled backups or sensor-triggered scripts.
Termux provides built-in support for remote access via OpenSSH, allowing it to function as both an SSH client and server for connecting to or from external devices and Android-native SSH applications. Users install the openssh package with pkg install (/page/OpenSSH), then start the server using sshd on the default port 8022 after setting a password with (/page/Passwd). This setup enables secure remote shell access from desktop machines or other Android devices, with public key authentication recommended for passwordless connections via (/page/Ssh-keygen) and ssh-copy-id. Integration with external Android SSH clients, such as Termius or JuiceSSH, is achieved by connecting to the device's local IP address (e.g., 192.168.1.20) and port 8022, supporting SFTP for file transfers when openssh-sftp-server is installed. Additionally, ADB port forwarding over USBvia adb forward tcp:8022 tcp:8022allows SSH access without Wi-Fi, bridging Termux to development tools on connected hosts. For secure remote access over the internet without port forwarding or public IP exposure, users can utilize Tailscale to establish a private mesh VPN. Install the Tailscale app from the Google Play Store on the Android device and log in to a Tailscale account. In Termux, install openssh if not already present (pkg install openssh), set a password with passwd, and start the server with sshd (default port 8022). Obtain the device's Tailscale IP address from the Tailscale app or the admin console at login.tailscale.com. From another device on the same Tailscale network, connect via ssh <termux-user>@<tailscale-ip> -p 8022 (replace <termux-user> with the Termux username obtained via the whoami command, often starting with u0_a...). This method uses Tailscale's mesh VPN for connectivity and complements local IP and ADB forwarding approaches for broader remote access. Note that Tailscale's advanced SSH server feature (Tailscale SSH) is not supported on Android.
For development workflows, Termux pairs effectively with IDEs like Visual Studio Code through remote SSH connections or server hosting, leveraging its SSH capabilities and API exposure. The VS Code Remote - SSH extension connects directly to Termux's SSH server, opening folders on the Android device for editing, debugging, and version control as if it were a local Linux machine. Alternatively, users can install code-servera browser-based VS Code servervia pkg install nodejs followed by (/page/Npm) install -g code-server, then access the IDE at http://localhost:8080 from any browser, including on the same device or remotely, with Termux:API providing Android-specific features like notifications or sensor data. ADB forwarding further enhances this by tunneling ports for low-latency access during tethered development sessions. Termux lacks native support for containerized formats like Flatpak or Snap due to its proot-based environment limitations.
Cloud syncing in Termux relies on standard tools like rsync and git to interface with services such as GitHub, enabling efficient file and repository synchronization without proprietary Android integrations. The rsync package, installed via pkg install rsync, synchronizes directories over SSH to remote servers or other devices, preserving permissions and handling incremental updates for large datasets, as in rsync -avz -e ssh /local/path user@remote:/remote/path. For version-controlled projects, git (installed with pkg install git) allows cloning, committing, and pushing to GitHub repositories directly from Termux, with scripts automating bidirectional syncs to maintain consistency across devices. Tools like rclone extend this to cloud providers beyond GitHub, mimicking rsync semantics for services like Google Drive, though setup requires configuration files for authentication.

Advanced Capabilities

Termux's advanced capabilities, often referred to as "deep use" or advanced usage, extend beyond basic command-line operations to provide a full Linux-like environment on Android without requiring root access. This includes:

Installing and running or compiling code in programming languages such as Python, Node.js, Rust, Go, and C.

Utilizing official add-ons like Termux:API to access Android features (e.g., SMS, camera, location), Termux:Tasker for automation integration, and Termux:Boot for executing scripts on device startup.

Connecting to remote servers via SSH, using rsync for backups, and hosting servers.

Setting up development environments with debugging tools such as GDB and LLDB.

Running complete Linux distributions through proot-distro.

These features enable sophisticated development, automation, networking, and system administration directly on mobile devices.

GUI and Container Support

Termux supports running graphical user interface (GUI) applications through integration with the X Window System, enabling users to execute X11-based programs on Android devices without native hardware rendering. To access GUI functionality, users must first enable the X11 repository by running the command pkg install x11-repo, which provides access to necessary X11 packages. This setup allows installation of graphical tools, though Termux lacks direct hardware acceleration for rendering, relying instead on software-based output via third-party viewer applications.
As of 2025, Termux offers additional modern options for GUI support. The Termux:X11 add-on app serves as an official X server, compatible with Termux for displaying X11 applications; it can be installed from GitHub releases and used by setting export DISPLAY=127.0.0.1:0 after launching the app. Furthermore, the Termux:GUI plugin enables creation of native Android GUI applications directly from command-line programs without requiring VNC or an X11 server. Installed via pkg install termux-gui, it provides APIs for Android components like buttons and layouts, integrating seamlessly with the host OS for a more responsive experience.
One common method for displaying GUI applications involves using a VNC server, such as TigerVNC, to create a virtual desktop environment. Users install the package with pkg install tigervnc, then start the server using vncserver -localhost, which prompts for a password and sets up a display (typically :1). To forward the display, the environment variable is exported via export DISPLAY=":1", after which GUI applications like web browsers or image editors can be launched from the Termux session. A VNC client app, such as RealVNC Viewer, connects to 127.0.0.1:5901 (where the port is 5900 plus the display number) to view and interact with the remote desktop on the same device. Alternatively, for direct X11 forwarding without VNC overhead, users can employ X server apps like XServer XSDL; after installing and launching the app, setting export DISPLAY=localhost:0 enables running applications such as Firefox or GIMP, which display output through the app's surface.
For more advanced window management, Termux users can install lightweight window managers like Fluxbox (pkg install fluxbox) or Openbox (pkg install openbox), configuring them in startup scripts such as ~/.vnc/xstartup to handle application windows efficiently. Full desktop environments, including XFCE (pkg install xfce4) or LXQt (pkg install lxqt), are also supported by starting their sessions (e.g., DISPLAY=:0 xfce4-session &) within the VNC or X server context, providing a more complete graphical workspace despite the absence of GPU acceleration. For a mobile-like experience, users can run Plasma Mobile or Phosh on Wayland; this involves installing postmarketOS via proot-distro (e.g., Alpine-based), then launching Phosh using a Wayland compositor like Cage (cage phoc -E '/usr/libexec/phosh' -U &) or Plasma Mobile with startplasma-wayland, often nested under X11 via Termux:X11.
In addition to GUI capabilities, Termux facilitates containerization through PRoot, a user-space tool that emulates chroot environments without requiring root privileges or kernel modifications. PRoot intercepts system calls via ptrace() to simulate a fake root filesystem, allowing isolated execution of Linux binaries and environments. It is installed via pkg install proot and invoked with commands like proot -r ./rootfs -0 -w / -b /dev -b /proc -b /sys /bin/sh to bind necessary directories and enter a chroot-like shell.
For managing full Linux distributions in isolated containers, Termux employs proot-distro, an extension built on PRoot that simplifies installation, login, and maintenance of distros such as Ubuntu or Debian. Installed with pkg install proot-distro, it supports commands like proot-distro install ubuntu to download and set up the root filesystem, followed by proot-distro login ubuntu to access the environment. This tool handles multiple predefined distros, including Alpine, Arch Linux, Fedora, Debian, and others, storing them as application data without affecting the host Android system. This provides a full Linux environment particularly useful for development, where users can install additional software using the distro's package manager. For a VS Code-like experience, code-server can be installed inside the distro: after logging in (e.g., to Ubuntu), install Node.js with sudo apt update && sudo apt install nodejs npm, then run sudo npm install -g code-server, and launch with code-server --bind-addr 127.0.0.1:8080. The editor is then accessible via a web browser at http://localhost:8080.(https://coder.com/docs/code-server/latest) Users can further enhance these environments by installing desktop environments; for example, in Ubuntu, run sudo apt install xubuntu-desktop after logging in, and in Fedora, use dnf groupinstall "KDE Plasma Workspaces" --skip-broken to add a DE like KDE.
One advanced use case is configuring Termux to function as a Linux desktop dock station. This involves running a Linux distribution (e.g., Debian or Ubuntu) via proot-distro, installing a desktop environment such as XFCE, and displaying it using Termux:X11 (preferred over VNC for superior performance). Users can connect the phone to a USB-C dock or monitor supporting DisplayPort Alt Mode for external display output, if the device supports video output, and pair Bluetooth or USB keyboard and mouse for input. Samsung devices with DeX perform particularly well due to DeX's native desktop mode. Not all phones support video output, so device compatibility should be verified.
However, as of 2025-2026, stability and performance of proot-distro vary on Android 14 and later. In particular, on Android 16 (e.g., Samsung One UI 8.0), users have reported extreme performance slowdowns with PRoot-based distros, affecting the launching of desktop environments via Termux:X11, running graphical applications such as Firefox or VSCode, and overall distro responsiveness compared to Android 15. This issue, likely linked to changes impacting the PRoot utility, has been observed across multiple distros and Samsung devices including the Galaxy Tab S9 and S24 series. Occasional bootstrap errors during distro installation have occurred on certain OEMs but were typically resolved in subsequent updates; no widespread bootstrap-specific failures dominate reports. General Termux instability on Android 12+ due to phantom process killing also persists in some cases. Users should verify compatibility for their device and version. For better performance on newer Android versions, it is recommended to use native Termux GUI options, such as direct Termux:X11 integration, Termux:GUI, or native desktop setups, instead of PRoot-distro for graphical environments. Termux and its proot-distro containers deliver excellent performance for coding tasks on high-end devices such as the Pixel 9 Pro with its Tensor G4 chip running Android 15, enabling efficient compilation, scripting, and server operation. Productivity can be further improved by pairing the device with an external keyboard and Bluetooth mouse. PRoot-based containers inherit Termux's package management for dependencies but operate in a segregated namespace, enabling users to run distro-specific software like GUI apps within the emulated environment while adhering to Android's security constraints.

Scripting and Automation

Termux provides robust support for shell scripting, enabling users to automate tasks using familiar Unix-like tools. The default shell is Bash, which offers comprehensive scripting capabilities for writing portable scripts that handle file operations, process control, and system interactions. Users can also install and switch to Zsh, a feature-rich shell that extends Bash with advanced scripting features like improved globbing, themeable prompts, and plugin support for enhanced productivity.
For scheduling scripts in a cron-like manner, Termux utilizes the termux-job-scheduler command from the Termux:API add-on, which leverages Android's AlarmManager to execute scripts at specified intervals or delays without requiring root access. This allows periodic automation of maintenance tasks, such as data syncing or log rotation, by running termux-job-scheduler -s script.sh -p 3600000 to schedule a script every hour (in milliseconds). Unlike traditional cron daemons, it schedules jobs sequentially after each completion to respect battery optimization constraints on Android. As of 2025, however, termux-job-scheduler may exhibit inconsistencies, such as random execution times, failures after updates to Termux 0.118.2 or later, or crashes on Android 14 and above; users are advised to monitor GitHub issues for fixes and consider alternatives like installing cronie within a proot-distro or using Termux:Tasker for integration with Android's automation features.
Practical examples include backup scripts using rsync for efficient file synchronization. A simple Bash script might mount storage, rsync user files to an external directory or remote server via SSH, and log the results, executable as ./backup.sh after granting storage permissions through Termux settings. Another common automation involves API calls for notifications, where termux-notification -t "Backup Complete" -c "Files synced successfully" displays a system alert upon task completion, integrating seamlessly into scripts for user feedback.
Advanced scripting extends to languages like Python, Node.js, Ruby, Go, Rust, and C/C++, which can invoke Termux:API commands for device-specific interactions, such as accessing sensors, sending or reading SMS messages. These languages are installed via the package manager with commands such as pkg install python nodejs ruby golang rust clang. Users can compile code using appropriate compilers and debug using tools like GDB and LLDB (pkg install gdb lldb). Users can edit code using terminal-based editors like vim or nano, installed via pkg install vim nano, and run scripts directly from the command line. Git is available for version control through pkg install git, enabling repository management and collaboration. For example, to clone a GitHub repository, users can run cd $HOME; git clone <repository-url>; cd <repository-folder>. Termux supports backend development and scripting in these and other programming languages, with the ability to operate offline once packages are installed, though its command-line interface may present a steeper learning curve for users unfamiliar with terminal environments. Users can verify the installed Python version by running python --version, which typically shows 3.11 or later in Termux. In Python, the subprocess module calls termux-api binaries, enabling scripts to, for instance, query battery status and trigger actions based on thresholds. To read the SMS inbox, scripts can invoke termux-sms-list, which returns a JSON array of all messages; received messages (inbox) are filtered by "type": 1. A concise Python example demonstrates this:
import subprocess
import json
from datetime import datetime

result = subprocess.run(, capture_output=True, text=True, check=True)
messages = json.loads(result.stdout)
inbox = 

for msg in inbox:
 timestamp = datetime.fromtimestamp(msg / 1000).strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S')
 print(f"From: {msg}")
 print(f"Date: {timestamp}")
 print(f"Body: {msg}")
 print("-" * 40)
This requires installing the termux-api package (pkg install termux-api), the Termux:API companion app, and granting SMS permissions to the app. Similarly, Node.js scripts use child processes for the same purpose, allowing asynchronous automation like periodic network checks. These require the Termux:API package and app installed from F-Droid (recommended for stable releases: https://f-droid.org/repo/com.termux.api_1002.apk (version 0.53.0)) or GitHub releases (official repository: https://github.com/termux/termux-api, e.g., https://github.com/termux/termux-api/releases/download/v0.53.0/termux-api-app_v0.53.0+github.debug.apk (debug build from source)), with runtime permissions granted via Android settings for features like notifications, location, or SMS.
Jupyter Notebook offers an interactive computing environment ideal for Python-based scripting, data analysis, and visualization on mobile devices. Libraries such as NumPy (numerical computing), Pandas (data manipulation and analysis), and Matplotlib (plotting) can be installed to support these tasks. To set up:

Update packages: pkg update && pkg upgrade -y

Install Python: pkg install python -y

Upgrade pip tools: pip install --upgrade pip setuptools wheel

Install the libraries: pip install numpy pandas matplotlib jupyter

NumPy is available prebuilt via pkg install python-numpy. For Pandas, users may add the third-party tur-repo (pkg install tur-repo) and install pkg install python-pandas for prebuilt binaries if pip compilation fails. Additional dependencies such as pkg install clang libjpeg-turbo freetype may be required for successful builds in some cases.
To launch Jupyter Notebook: jupyter notebook --ip=127.0.0.1 --port=8888 --no-browser. The command outputs a URL (e.g., http://127.0.0.1:8888/?token=...) that users can open in an Android browser to access the interface. This enables interactive notebooks for data exploration, leveraging NumPy, Pandas, and Matplotlib for sophisticated analysis and visualization directly on Android devices.
Scripts can be executed directly via ./script.sh after setting execute permissions with chmod +x. However, users may encounter "permission denied" errors or "bad interpreter" messages (sometimes silent failures) due to several common issues. Incorrect shebang paths, such as #!/bin/bash, fail because /bin/bash does not exist in Termux; the recommended portable alternative is #!/usr/bin/env bash, which uses the PATH to locate bash. Scripts must have execute permissions granted via chmod +x script.sh. Additionally, Android mounts shared or external storage (e.g., /sdcard or similar paths) with the noexec flag, blocking script execution even after chmod +x, requiring scripts to be moved to Termux's private storage such as $HOME (~/) or $PREFIX/bin. For legacy shebangs like #!/bin/sh that assume traditional Unix paths, installing pkg install termux-exec provides a wrapper to fix exec calls and enable compatibility.
Scripts can be executed through home screen shortcuts using the Termux:Widget add-on. Placing scripts in ~/.shortcuts/ enables widget creation, allowing one-tap launches while handling background execution permissions to prevent Android from killing processes. For persistent automation across reboots, integration with Termux:Boot can trigger scripts on device startup.

Ethical Hacking and Penetration Testing Tools

In 2025-2026, popular Termux packages (installed via pkg install) for ethical hacking and penetration testing include:

nmap: Network scanning and reconnaissance.

hydra: Password brute-forcing.

sqlmap: Automated SQL injection and database takeover.

metasploit: Exploitation framework (may require pkg install unstable-repo first).

Other common ones: git (for cloning tools), python (for scripting), openssh (secure access).

These are frequently recommended in guides for Android-based pentesting without root. Some additional tools (e.g., zphisher for phishing) may require git clones. Always use these tools ethically and legally, only with explicit permission from the target owner.

Networking Capabilities

Termux enables users to perform a variety of networking tasks using standard Linux command-line tools. To begin, update and upgrade packages:
pkg update && pkg upgrade
Common networking tools are installed with pkg install <package>, including:

openssh: Provides SSH client and server capabilities (e.g., run sshd to start the SSH server on port 8022 by default). The SSH client supports connecting to a custom port using the -p option, for example: ssh -p 2222 user@hostname or ssh -p 2222 . To run the SSH server on a temporary custom port, use sshd -p 2222. For a permanent change, edit $PREFIX/etc/ssh/sshd_config (usually ~/../usr/etc/ssh/sshd_config), change or add the line Port 2222, then restart sshd (e.g., pkill sshd && sshd). For remote (internet) access without port forwarding or root access, users can integrate with mesh VPN services like Tailscale: install the Tailscale app on the Android device, connect to a shared tailnet, then connect via SSH to the device's Tailscale IP address on port 8022 (e.g., ssh -p 8022, where user is the Termux username from whoami). Tailscale's advanced managed SSH feature is not supported as a server on Android.

nmap: For network discovery and scanning (e.g., nmap 192.168.1.0/24 to scan the local network).

curl: For making HTTP requests (e.g., curl https://example.com).

wget: For file downloads.

traceroute: For tracing packet routes to hosts.

net-tools: Provides legacy tools such as ifconfig and netstat.

tcpdump: For packet capture and analysis.

iperf: For network performance testing.

Basic usage examples include:

Testing connectivity: ping google.com

Viewing network interfaces: ip a (after pkg install iproute2)

Performing DNS lookups: nslookup google.com

For detailed tutorials on specific tools (e.g., Nmap, SSH, curl, traceroute) and advanced networking or remote access configurations, consult community guides and the official Termux wiki.

Community and Ecosystem

Development Contributions

Termux's development is open-source and community-driven, with contributions primarily handled through its primary GitHub repositories: termux-app for the core Android application and termux-packages for the package ecosystem. Developers and users can fork the termux-app repository, implement changes such as bug fixes or new features following guidelines like using Conventional Commits for messages and avoiding hardcoded values, and then submit pull requests for review. As of 2025, the termux-app repository has garnered over 100 contributors, reflecting broad involvement in enhancing the terminal emulator and its plugins.
Package contributions focus on expanding the available software library via the termux-packages repository, which includes scripts, patches, and build tools tailored for Android's constraints. To add or update packages, contributors create or modify build scripts (e.g., .sh files) that automate cross-compilation from source code, accounting for Termux's non-standard prefix (/data/data/com.termux/files/usr) and dependencies like ndk-sysroot for ARM architectures; the build-package.sh script at the repository root is used to compile packages locally or in a CI environment. Detailed guidelines in the repository's CONTRIBUTING.md emphasize testing builds on target devices and submitting PRs with patches for upstream compatibility.
Testing plays a key role in contributions, with beta releases of the termux-app distributed via GitHub for early adoption and feedback; users install these APKs to evaluate changes and report issues through the app's built-in "Report Issue" menu, which captures logs like logcat output, or directly on GitHub issues with attached debug information. This process ensures stability before stable releases, with contributors encouraged to include reproducible steps and device details in reports.
Overall governance of Termux remains informal, led by original developer Fredrik Fornwall alongside a volunteer community, without affiliation to a formal foundation or organization; the project actively seeks additional maintainers to distribute workload, and in 2025, it received further support through the GitHub Secure Open Source Fund, with team members participating in its program.

Support and Resources

Termux provides extensive documentation through its official wiki, which offers detailed guides on setup, package management, and advanced usage, including troubleshooting common errors like permission denials in Android environments. The FAQ section within the wiki specifically covers frequent user issues, such as storage access problems and command-line errors, helping beginners and experienced users alike resolve setup hurdles. Supplementary documentation is hosted on termux.dev, which includes API references and plans for consolidating all resources in a centralized format.
The community plays a vital role in user support, with the official Reddit subreddit r/termux serving as the primary forum for discussions, troubleshooting, and sharing Termux-related projects and tips. This active community, established in 2015, focuses exclusively on Termux usage, experiences, and content creation by members. Real-time interactions are facilitated through the official Termux Discord server, where over 10,000 members collaborate on queries and updates. For technical questions, the Stack Overflow tag aggregates solutions to programming and configuration challenges, with thousands of posts aiding developers integrating Termux into workflows.
Official channels ensure structured support for issues and contributions. Bugs and feature requests are handled via GitHub issues in repositories like termux-app for the core application and termux-packages for ecosystem maintenance, allowing users to report problems directly to maintainers. The termux-dev mailing list, hosted on groups.io, provides a moderated space for developers to discuss in-depth technical topics, join via subscription, and access archives for reference.
Learning resources abound for mastering Termux, particularly through video tutorials on YouTube that cover everything from basic commands to advanced scripting, with 2025-specific guides addressing recent Android compatibility updates. Blogs and online handbooks, such as the Termux Command Handbook on GitHub, offer structured references for commands and API utilities, while developer-focused articles on platforms like DEV Community provide step-by-step development tutorials.

Limitations and Alternatives

Platform Constraints

Termux operates without requiring root access on Android devices, which prevents it from modifying core system files or directories outside its allocated app space. Instead, it relies on user-space implementations such as PRoot to simulate chroot environments for running Linux distributions, a workaround that introduces performance overhead due to non-native execution and interception of system calls, resulting in slower operation compared to traditional rooted setups.
In late 2025 and into 2026, particularly following updates to Android 16 (such as Samsung One UI 8.0), users have reported extreme performance slowdowns when using PRoot-based distributions via proot-distro. These issues significantly impact the launching of desktop environments in Termux:X11, the execution of graphical applications such as Firefox and VS Code, and overall distro responsiveness, with notable degradation compared to Android 15. The problems have been documented across multiple Samsung devices, including models in the Galaxy Tab S9 and S24 series, and are believed to stem from platform-specific changes affecting PRoot efficiency. As a workaround, users are advised to prefer native Termux desktop environment setups over PRoot-distro installations where feasible.
Android's battery optimization features, including Doze mode introduced in Android 6.0, impose constraints on Termux by deferring background CPU and network activity when the device is idle, which can suspend or throttle long-running sessions and processes even if wakelocks are acquired. Users can run termux-wake-lock within Termux to acquire a partial wakelock, preventing the device from entering deep sleep and aiding background execution, though disabling battery optimization for the app is frequently required for reliable operation. This limitation affects tasks like continuous scripting or downloads in the background, potentially causing interruptions unless battery optimizations are explicitly disabled for the app. Additionally, resource-intensive operations such as compiling software from source can lead to high CPU utilization on mobile hardware, accelerating battery drain and generating heat.
On Xiaomi devices running MIUI (including MIUI 13), more aggressive background process management often kills apps like Termux despite general Android settings. Persistent execution typically requires combining multiple adjustments:

Enable Autostart in the Security app > Permissions > Auto-start > enable for Termux.

Disable battery restrictions via Settings > Additional Settings > Battery & Performance > Manage apps battery usage > select Termux > "No restrictions", or alternatively Security > Battery > App Battery Saver > Termux > "No restriction".

Lock the app in Security app > Boost speed > settings (gear) > Lock apps > lock Termux, or from the recent apps tray by swiping up, locating Termux, and tapping the padlock icon.

Run termux-wake-lock in Termux and ensure "No restrictions" is set in the app's battery settings.

Optionally, disable MIUI Optimizations in Developer options (enable Developer options by tapping MIUI version 10 times in Settings > About phone, then find the option in Additional Settings > Developer options) if problems persist.
MIUI's stringent controls frequently necessitate these combined steps for reliable background functionality.

Due to resource constraints on mobile devices, on-device compilation of Python packages with native extensions is often impractical, leading to frequent failures or out-of-memory errors. When available, prebuilt packages from the Termux repositories are recommended (for example, pkg install python-lxml for the lxml package).
Termux officially ended support for Android versions 5 and 6 on January 1, 2020, meaning no further updates to package repositories or the app itself are provided for those platforms, which may leave users on older devices vulnerable to security issues or incompatible with modern packages. On more recent Android versions (Android 11 and later), enhancements to scoped storagemandatory for apps targeting API level 30 or higherrestrict direct file access to external storage and shared directories, potentially breaking scripts or tools that rely on legacy storage permissions unless the "All files access" permission is granted. This permission is necessary to resolve the "inaccessible or not found" error that typically occurs when running termux-setup-storage, often due to insufficient storage permissions or an outdated/missing termux-am package on Android 11+, especially Android 14 and later. Detailed resolution steps are described in the Initial Configuration section. Furthermore, Android mounts shared storage directories (such as /sdcard or /storage/emulated/0) with the noexec flag, preventing the execution of binaries or scripts from these locations even when access permissions are granted and executable bits are set via chmod +x. This results in "permission denied" errors (sometimes silent) when attempting to run scripts or programs stored on external or shared storage. To avoid these execution restrictions, users should store executable scripts and binaries within Termux's private internal storage, such as $HOME (~/) or $PREFIX/bin.
Termux may experience instability on Android 12 and later versions due to operating system process restrictions, including phantom process killing, which can terminate background processes unexpectedly and result in errors such as "Process completed (signal 9)". This limitation remains relevant as documented in ongoing project discussions.
Beginning in September 2026, Google's developer verification policy for apps on certified devices may impact sideloading of unverified builds from sources such as GitHub. Nevertheless, Termux remains available through verified channels including F-Droid and an experimental Google Play build, and the project continues to receive active maintenance with ongoing package updates.
Termux's storage usage within its private app directory can increase substantially over time due to the accumulation of package caches, temporary files from builds or operations, downloaded data, and installed packages. On devices with limited internal storage, this can result in significant consumption, with usage sometimes reaching several gigabytes or more if not periodically managed. To mitigate this, users can install and use ncdu (pkg install ncdu) to inspect disk usage within /data/data/com.termux/files, execute pkg clean or apt clean to remove cached package files, uninstall unnecessary packages using pkg uninstall, and manually remove temporary or unneeded files.
The Android security model enforces strict app sandboxing, isolating Termux from low-level hardware interfaces like certain device nodes in /dev or kernel modules, thereby limiting capabilities such as direct GPU acceleration or sensor access without root privileges or specialized add-ons. This sandboxing enhances overall device security but requires workarounds, such as API add-ons, for advanced hardware interactions.

Comparisons to Other Solutions

Termux distinguishes itself from rooted emulators such as Linux Deploy by requiring no root access, enabling simpler setup through direct app installation without modifying the Android system. In contrast, Linux Deploy relies on chroot environments that demand root privileges for deeper system integration, such as direct hardware access and full filesystem mounting, making it more suitable for advanced users seeking native-like Linux behavior but at the cost of increased complexity and potential security risks.
Compared to other Android-based Linux apps like UserLAnd and Andronix, Termux offers a broader package ecosystem via its dedicated repositories, supporting thousands of pre-compiled tools through the apt or pkg managers without needing additional distribution installations. UserLAnd, an evolution from an older Termux fork, focuses on running multiple Linux distributions in proot environments but supports older Android versions (down to 5.0) and emphasizes single-app execution over extensive package management. Andronix builds upon Termux by integrating proot for full distro support (e.g., Ubuntu, Debian) alongside GUI options via VNC or XSDL, yet it depends on Termux for core command-line functionality and shares the same no-root user-space limitations. Unlike some rivals, Termux avoids proot overhead in its base setup, providing a more streamlined terminal experience.
Termux's key strengths lie in its portability and no-root accessibility, allowing users to run a Linux-like environment on unmodified Android devices with minimal storage (under 200 MB initially) and low battery impact. However, it exhibits performance drawbacks for heavy computational tasks, such as those involving high process counts or graphics, where emulated environments lag behind native desktop or rooted setups due to Android's process limits and bionic libc constraints.

References

Termux | The main termux site and help pages.

Termux - a terminal emulator application for Android OS ... - GitHub

Termux | F-Droid - Free and Open Source Android App Repository

Getting started - Termux Wiki

FAQ - Termux Wiki

Termux Wiki

Internal and external storage - Termux Wiki

PRoot - Termux Wiki

Fredrik Fornwall's CV

Termux - Apps on Google Play

Termux on Google Play - GitHub

 Bintray repository hosting shut down | Error 403 Forbidden

termux/termux-api: Termux add-on app which exposes ... - GitHub

https://github.com/termux/termux-app/releases/tag/v0.118.1

Releases termux/termux-app - GitHub

https://github.com/termux/termux-app/releases/tag/v0.118.3

https://github.com/termux-play-store/

Termux-setup-storage

Package Management - Termux Wiki

: Wrong TERM set Issue #2744 termux/termux-app - GitHub

Keyboard backspace key sends DEL Issue #212 termux ... - GitHub

Touch Keyboard - Termux Wiki

Does Termux encode the keyboard/console output as UTF-8 or latin ...

User Interface - Termux Wiki

Terminal Settings - Termux Wiki

Termux:Styling

Termux add-on app for customizing the terminal font and color theme.

Differences from Linux - Termux Wiki

Development Environments - Termux Wiki

Package Management termux/termux-packages Wiki - GitHub

Mirrors termux/termux-packages Wiki - GitHub

Termux add-on app allowing programs to be run at boot. - GitHub

termux/termux-widget: Termux add-on app which adds ... - GitHub

Termux add-on app to show the terminal in a floating ... - GitHub

Termux add-on app for integration with Tasker. - GitHub

Termux:Tasker

Run Termux Command with Termux:Tasker - LlamaLab

Remote Access - Termux Wiki

My favorite SSH clients for Android - and why you need them - ZDNET

How to Access Termux Linux Android via SSH over USB

Remote Development using SSH - Visual Studio Code

sumdher/VSCode-on-Android: Guide to run Visual Studio ... - GitHub

Is it possible to use snapd or flatpak on Debian installed on Termux?

Termux scripts to simplify syncing of Git repositories with ... - GitHub

rclone/rclone: "rsync for cloud storage" - Google Drive, S3 ... - GitHub

Graphical Environment - Termux Wiki

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=x.org.server

https://github.com/termux/proot

termux/proot-distro: An utility for managing installations of ... - GitHub

Shells - Termux Wiki

ZSH - Termux Wiki

Termux:API

Could termux-job-scheduler schedule jobs at a particular time (like ...

Termux-notification

Backing up Android Photos using Termux and Rsync - mtoohey

Mastering Termux for Android Ethical Hacking and Automation

Termux:Widget

termux-app - GitHub

A package build system for Termux. - GitHub

Building packages termux/termux-packages Wiki - GitHub

termux-packages/CONTRIBUTING.md at master termux/termux-packages

Issues termux/termux-app - GitHub

Fredrik Fornwall fornwall - GitHub

Termux Docs

termux - Reddit

Community - Termux Wiki

Termux - Discord

Newest 'termux' Questions - Stack Overflow

Issues termux/termux-packages - GitHub

https://groups.io/g/termux-dev

Termux Linux Commands FULL Tutorial (2025) - YouTube

Complete Termux Linux Tutorial for Android 2025 - YouTube

BlackTechX011/Termux-Command-Handbook - GitHub

Getting Started with TERMUX - DEV Community

: performance improvement Issue #4595 termux/termux-app

Optimize for Doze and App Standby | App quality - Android Developers

Termux slows down in "doze mode" (battery optimization) even with ...

End of android-5/6 (termux.net) support on 2020-01-01 #4467 - GitHub

Scoped storage - Android Open Source Project

: Add "all files access" permission Issue #3489 - GitHub

What are the differences between Termux, PRoot, Userland, Linux ...

Termux vs. Full Linux on Android: Pros and Cons Today

How does this work? - Andronix Docs

Mirrors termux/termux-packages Wiki GitHub

Termux Python Installation Discussion

Termux Python Wiki

Error: Installing pip is forbidden Issue

Termux Wiki: Python

Running postmarketOS on Android Termux proot without flashing a custom rom

How to install proot Ubuntu in Termux on Android phone (Desktop + Audio + One-click starter)

How to Install and Update Fedora Linux on Android using Termux

Getting started - Termux Wiki

Set up Git - GitHub Docs

Python - Termux Wiki

Node.js - Termux Wiki

Ruby - Termux Wiki

Termux Wiki: Python

Termux Wiki: Ruby

Termux Packages: Go

Termux Wiki: Git

Termux Wiki: Editors

Building packages - Termux Wiki

Git for Termux

Termux:API on F-Droid

Termux:API on F-Droid

Termux:API GitHub Repository

code-server Documentation

Termux:API - Termux Wiki

: install lxml error Issue #24167 termux/termux-packages

: install lxml error

What is the preferred Bash shebang ("#!")?

TERMUX- bash: ./a.out: Permission denied

Termux-exec - Termux Wiki

: Bash ... Permission denied Issue #10591 termux/termux-packages

Scripts started from widget cannot execute other scripts #37 termux/termux-widget

Termux Wiki - Package Management

Termux unrar package

RAR package discussion in Termux

Termux packages repository on GitHub

Termux App GitHub Issue #2366

Android Developer Verification

Elevating Android Security

Penetration Testing on Android: Using Termux Like a Pro

Turn Your Android into a Cybersecurity Toolkit with Metasploit and Termux

How to Easily Set Up Metasploit on Termux (2025 Guide)

Penetration Testing on Android: Using Termux Like a Pro

Termux on android 5 or 6 - termux/termux-app Wiki

Releases termux/termux-app

Termux on Android 5 or 6 - GitHub Wiki

F-Droid Termux Package Page

Termux GitHub Repository

: termux-setup-storage does not work on Android 14

Termux User Repository (TUR)

: Proot-distro extreme slowdown after updating to Samsung's Android 16 release, affecting all desktop environments

termux-desktop: Termux Graphical Environment installer

Proot-distro extreme slowdown after updating to Samsung's Android 16 release, affecting all desktop environments

Remote Access - Termux Wiki

Termux Wiki Main Page

Development Environments - Termux Wiki

Termux App Repository

: Unable to set breakpoints and catch them using GDB/LLDB

Termux on Google Play Store

Termux on Google Play GitHub Repository

Termux on Google Play

Termux on Google Play - GitHub

Termux on Google Play Store

Termux GitHub Repository

Termux on Google Play

Termux SSH with Tailscale

Tailscale SSH

Download Tailscale for Android

termux_ssh GitHub Repository

Tailscale SSH

Srinath10X/termux-setup GitHub Repository

adi1090x/termux-style GitHub Repository

Unlock Termuxs full potential: 5 essential setup steps

termux-style GitHub Repository

Termux-wake-lock - Termux Wiki

Xiaomi | Dont kill my app!

Termux:X11 GitHub Repository

Termux Wiki: Graphical Environment

proot-distro GitHub Repository

List of Smartphones with DisplayPort Alt Mode

Termux:X11 GitHub Repository

Termux Wiki - Installation

Termux Wiki - Installation

Termux Wiki - Installation

Termux Wiki - Getting Started
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion