Turing machine Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 28 days ago 
Turing machine
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 A Turing machine is an abstract mathematical model of computation that formalizes algorithmic processes through a simple, idealized device consisting of an infinite tape divided into discrete cells, a read-write head that scans and modifies symbols on the tape, and a finite control unit with a set of states that dictates transitions based on the current state and scanned symbol. Invented by British mathematician Alan Turing in 1936, the model was introduced in his seminal paper "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem," where it served to precisely define the notion of computability by simulating the step-by-step procedures of a human "computer" performing mechanical calculations.
The Turing machine operates deterministically: at each step, given its current internal state and the symbol under the head, it follows a fixed transition rule to write a new symbol (or erase by writing a blank), move the head one cell left or right, and enter a new state, continuing until it reaches a halting state or loops indefinitely. This setup allows it to perform any computation that can be expressed as a finite sequence of such elementary operations, including reading input on the tape, processing it, and producing output. Turing also described a universal Turing machine, a single device capable of simulating any other Turing machine given its description as input, laying the groundwork for programmable computers and the concept of software.
In computability theory, Turing machines provide a foundational framework for understanding the limits of computation, proving key results such as the undecidability of the halting problemwhich demonstrates that no general algorithm exists to determine whether an arbitrary Turing machine will halt on a given input. The model's equivalence to other formal systems of computation, including Alonzo Church's lambda calculus and recursive functions, underpins the Church-Turing thesis, a widely accepted conjecture stating that any effectively calculable function can be computed by a Turing machine, though it remains unprovable as it bridges formal mathematics with intuitive notions of algorithm. Despite their theoretical nature, Turing machines have profoundly influenced modern computer science, serving as the basis for complexity classes like P and NP, and highlighting the boundaries between solvable and unsolvable problems.

Overview

Informal description

A Turing machine is an abstract computational device that models the process of algorithmic computation through simple mechanical operations. It consists of an infinite tape divided into discrete cells, each capable of holding a single symbol from a finite alphabet, such as 0, 1, or a blank symbol. A read/write head moves along the tape, scanning one cell at a time, reading the symbol in that cell, and either writing a new symbol or leaving it unchanged. The machine operates in one of a finite number of internal states, and its behavior is governed by a fixed set of instructions, often conceptualized as a transition table, which specifies the next actionwriting a symbol, moving the head left or right, and changing to a new statebased solely on the current state and the scanned symbol.
The tape extends infinitely in both directions, allowing unlimited storage, though only a finite portion is used in any computation. The head starts on a designated cell with the input encoded as a sequence of symbols on the tape, surrounded by blanks. At each step, the machine consults its transition table to determine its response, effectively simulating a step-by-step procedure without external memory limits beyond the tape itself. Computation proceeds until the machine enters a special halting state, at which point it stops, and the final configuration of the tape represents the output. This halting mechanism ensures that the machine terminates for valid inputs, producing a result encoded on the tape.
To illustrate, consider a simple Turing machine that adds two unary numbers, where numbers are represented by strings of 1's separated by a 0 (e.g., the tape initially holds 11101111, encoding 3 + 4). The machine begins in an initial state with the head on the leftmost 1. It first moves right through the first group of 1's and the separator 0 to reach the second group. Then, it erases one 1 from the right end of the second group and moves left to the separator, overwriting the 0 with a 1 to extend the first group. This process repeats for each 1 in the second group: after erasing the first 1 from the second group and overwriting the separator, the tape becomes 111111 (six 1's) followed by a single 1 in the second group position; continuing this way, it erases all four 1's from the second group while appending four 1's to the first, yielding 1111111 (seven 1's) as the sum. Once the second group is fully erased (reaching a blank in that area), the machine moves to a halting state, leaving the tape with the unary representation of 7 as output.

Physical analogy

The Turing machine can be intuitively understood through a physical analogy proposed by Alan Turing, likening it to a human clerk performing computations on an infinite strip of paper. In this setup, the clerk uses a long paper tape divided into squares, each capable of holding a symbol from a finite set, such as digits or marks, with the tape extending infinitely in both directions to represent unlimited memory. The clerk employs a typewriter-like head to read the symbol on the current square, erase or write a new symbol as needed, and move the tape left or right by one square, all while consulting a fixed rulebook that dictates the next action based on the observed symbol and the clerk's current "state of mind."
This analogy maps the Turing machine's core elements directly to familiar objects: the infinite tape serves as both input medium and workspace, the head as the focused reading/writing tool, and the rulebook as a deterministic table of instructions ensuring each step follows mechanically without discretion. The clerk's finite memorylimited to recalling only the current instruction and symbolcorresponds to the machine's finite set of states, enforcing a structured, step-by-step process akin to rote calculation. The rulebook's rigidity highlights the deterministic nature, where no choice exists; for each state-symbol pair, a unique action (write, move, change state) is prescribed, mirroring how the machine avoids ambiguity in computation.
While the analogy breaks down in practicalitythe human clerk cannot physically handle an infinite tape, requiring idealized assumptions about endless paper supplyit effectively illustrates the sequential, local processing at the heart of the model. This visualization aids non-experts in grasping how complex computations emerge from simple, repetitive operations on a linear medium, bridging the abstract formalism to tangible mechanics without implying real-world buildability.

Formal definition

Components and symbols

A Turing machine is formally defined by a collection of basic components that enable it to perform computations through symbol manipulation on an infinite tape. These components include a finite set of states, an infinite tape, a read/write head, and a transition function that dictates behavior based on the current state and scanned symbol. This model, originally conceived by Alan Turing to formalize the notion of mechanical computation, has been standardized in modern terms as a 7-tuple $ M = (Q, \Sigma, \Gamma, \delta, q_0, q_{\text{accept}}, q_{\text{reject}}) $.
The finite set of states $ Q $ represents the possible internal configurations or "m-configurations" of the machine, capturing its control logic at any step. This set is finite, ensuring that the machine's decision-making is bounded in complexity. It includes a distinguished initial state $ q_0 \in Q $, from which computation begins, and halting states such as $ q_{\text{accept}} $ and $ q_{\text{reject}} $ for recognizing languages (or a single halting state in some variants for general computation). In Turing's original formulation, these states correspond to the machine's "state of mind," determining the sequence of operations.
The tape serves as the machine's unbounded memory, modeled as a bi-infinite one-dimensional array of cells extending in both directions. Each cell holds exactly one symbol from the finite tape alphabet $ \Gamma $, which includes a special blank symbol, often denoted $ \square $ or $ B $, representing empty cells. The input alphabet $ \Sigma $ is a proper subset of $ \Gamma $ (excluding the blank), consisting of the symbols that may appear in the initial input string placed contiguously on the tape starting from some reference position, with all other cells initially blank. This setup allows the tape to store and modify data arbitrarily during computation.
A single read/write head provides the interface between the finite control (states) and the tape, always positioned over exactly one cell. The head can read the symbol in the current cell, erase or overwrite it with another symbol from $ \Gamma $, and then move to an adjacent cell, either left (L) or right (R). Initially, the head is positioned on the leftmost cell of the input or at a designated starting cell. This mechanism enables sequential access and modification of the tape contents.
The transition function $ \delta: Q \times \Gamma \to Q \times \Gamma \times {L, R} $ is the core rule set that defines the machine's deterministic behavior. For each pair consisting of the current state $ q \in Q $ and scanned symbol $ a \in \Gamma $, $ \delta(q, a) $ specifies a triple $ (q', b, D) $, where $ q' \in Q $ is the next state, $ b \in \Gamma $ is the symbol to write in the current cell (replacing $ a $), and $ D \in {L, R} $ directs the head movement. The function is partial: for halting states, no transitions are defined, causing the machine to stop. These transitions collectively determine the evolution of the machine's configuration over time.

Configurations and transitions

A configuration of a Turing machine captures its complete state at any instant during computation, consisting of the current internal state, the contents of the tape, and the position of the read/write head. Formally, an instantaneous description (ID) is represented as a string of the form $ P q_i S_j Q $, where $ P $ is the (possibly empty) sequence of symbols to the left of the head, $ q_i $ is the current state, $ S_j $ is the symbol scanned by the head, and $ Q $ is the (possibly infinite) sequence of symbols to the right of the head, with trailing blanks implied. This notation derives from the original formulation where configurations encode the machine's progress without ambiguity.
The computation begins with an initial configuration: the machine starts in its initial state $ q_0 $, the tape holds the input string flanked by infinite blanks on both sides, and the head is positioned on the leftmost symbol of the input. Subsequent configurations are generated by applying the transition function $ \delta $, which, given the current state and scanned symbol, specifies a new symbol to write, a direction to move the head (left or right), and a next state. This process yields a sequence of configurations until the machine halts. The output, or yield, of the computation is the finite non-blank portion of the tape in the halting configuration.
Halting occurs if the transition function $ \delta $ is undefined for the current state and scanned symbol, or if the machine enters a designated halting state with no further transitions. However, computations may enter non-halting loops, continuing indefinitely without reaching a halt, as seen in machines designed to simulate unending processes.
Consider a Turing machine that recognizes the language of palindromes over {0,1}, strings that read the same forwards and backwards, such as "101". The machine operates by repeatedly matching and erasing the first and last symbols: it reads the leftmost symbol, remembers it in its state, erases it to a blank, moves right to the end of the (current) input, checks if the rightmost symbol matches the remembered one, erases it if so, and returns leftward to repeat until the tape is effectively empty (accepting if all matches succeed) or a mismatch occurs (rejecting). For input "101" on a tape initially flanked by blanks (B), the computation proceeds as follows (using simplified ID notation with the state embedded and head position indicated by underlining; trailing blanks omitted for brevity):

Initial: $ \underline{q_0} 1 0 1 $ (head on first 1, state $ q_0 $ start).

After step 1: $ B \underline{q_1} 0 1 $ (read 1, wrote B, moved right to state $ q_1 $ remembering 1; head on 0).

After step 2: $ B 0 \underline{q_2} 1 $ (moved right, now at end in state $ q_2 $ to check match; head on last 1).

After step 3: $ B \underline{q_3} 0 B $ (matched 1, wrote B on last 1, moved left to state $ q_3 $ to return; head on 0).

After step 4 (continuing): $ \underline{q_4} B B B $ (returned left to first B, but in full process: read 0, wrote B, moved right remembering 0; then to end on B, match by moving left since middle, and halt in accept state after verifying the single middle symbol).

This trace illustrates how configurations evolve through targeted symbol manipulation and head movement, confirming the palindrome property after $ O(n^2) $ steps for length $ n $.

Visualization and implementation

State diagrams

State diagrams provide a graphical method to model the behavior of a Turing machine, representing it as a directed graph where nodes depict the machine's states. The initial state is typically indicated by an incoming arrow, while halting states are often shown with double circles to distinguish them from active states. Directed edges connect these nodes, each labeled with a transition triple consisting of the symbol read from the tape, the symbol written to the tape, and the direction of head movement (L for left or R for right), such as "1/0,R" to denote reading a 1, overwriting it with 0, and moving right.
To construct a state diagram, begin by creating a node for each state in the machine's finite control, as defined by the transition function . Then, for every possible input symbol and current state, add an outgoing edge to the next state, labeling it according to 's output: the written symbol and movement direction. This process ensures the diagram fully captures the machine's deterministic behavior without ambiguity.
A representative example is a 3-state Turing machine for incrementing a unary number, where the input is a string of 1's representing the value (e.g., 111 for 3), and the output appends an additional 1 (e.g., 1111 for 4). The states include q (start, scanning right over 1's to the blank), q (writing 1 on the blank and moving left), and q (halt). Transitions include: from q on 1/1,R to q (skip existing 1's); from q on B/1,L to q (append 1 and return); from q on 1/1,L to q (move left over 1's); and from q on B/B,R to q (halt after returning to start). This diagram visually traces the control flow from scanning to modification and termination.
State diagrams offer key advantages in design and analysis by clearly visualizing control flow and state transitions, which facilitates detecting infinite loops or unreachable states during machine development. They are instrumental in theoretical proofs, such as those for the Busy Beaver problem, where enumerating and graphing all possible n-state machines (e.g., for n=5) aids in identifying maximal runtime configurations before halting.
However, state diagrams have limitations, as they abstract away the tape's content and head position, providing no direct view of memory evolution; thus, they must be supplemented with configuration traces or simulations for thorough verification of computations.

Tape and head mechanics

In practical implementations of Turing machines, the theoretically infinite tape is simulated using finite but expandable data structures to approximate unbounded memory. A standard approach employs two stacks (or lists): one stack represents the tape contents to the left of the read-write head (with the top of the stack holding the symbol immediately left of the head), and the other represents the contents from the current position under the head to the right (with the top holding the symbol under the head). This two-stack model efficiently handles bidirectional extension by treating blanks as implicit beyond the stacks' bounds.
Head movement in this model is managed by transferring symbols between the stacks. Reading peeks at the top of the right stack (or uses blank if empty) to get the current symbol under the head. Writing replaces the top of the right stack with the new symbol (pop and push if not empty, or push if empty). For moving right, pop the top (written symbol) from the right stack and push it onto the left stack. For moving left, pop the written symbol from the right stack, pop from the left stack (or use blank if empty) as the new symbol under the head, push the old written symbol onto the right stack, then push the new symbol onto the right stack. This avoids fixed-size limitations and simulates the infinite tape described in the original model, where the tape extends indefinitely with blanks.
Although theoretically unbounded, real-world implementations face memory constraints, as stacks or lists grow with computation length, potentially leading to allocation failures for extensive runs. However, these limits do not alter the model's equivalence to computation, as the tape is presumed arbitrarily extensible in theory, allowing simulations to proceed until practical resources are exhausted. Transition lookup during simulation may reference a state diagram for clarity, but is typically implemented as a table mapping current state and symbol to the next action.
The following pseudocode illustrates a single simulation step using the two-stack model, assuming stacks left_tape and right_tape with methods empty(), peek(), pop(), push(), and the head position encoded such that right_tape top is under head:
function single_step(current_state, left_tape, right_tape, delta, blank):
 # Read current symbol (peek top of right_tape or blank if empty)
 if right_tape.empty():
 current_symbol = blank
 else:
 current_symbol = right_tape.peek()
 
 # Apply transition function (state diagram or table lookup)
 (new_state, write_symbol, direction) = delta(current_state, current_symbol)
 
 # Write the new symbol (replace or extend right_tape)
 if right_tape.empty():
 right_tape.push(write_symbol)
 else:
 right_tape.pop()
 right_tape.push(write_symbol)
 
 # Move head
 if direction == 'R':
 # Transfer written symbol to left
 transferred = right_tape.pop()
 left_tape.push(transferred)
 elif direction == 'L':
 # Complex transfer for left: pop written, get new under from left or blank
 old_current = right_tape.pop()
 if left_tape.empty():
 new_current = blank
 else:
 new_current = left_tape.pop()
 # Reconstruct right_tape: push old_current then new_current (top)
 right_tape.push(old_current)
 right_tape.push(new_current)
 
 return new_state, left_tape, right_tape
This step reads the symbol under the head, applies the transition to determine the new state, written symbol, and direction, then updates the tape and head position accordingly.

Variants

Nondeterministic Turing machines

A nondeterministic Turing machine (NTM) is a variant of the Turing machine that permits multiple possible transitions from a given configuration, enabling the computation to branch into several paths simultaneously. Unlike the deterministic transition function : Q Q {L, R}, the nondeterministic version defines : Q finite subsets of (Q {L, R}), where each subset contains zero or more possible next states, tape symbols to write, and head directions (left or right). This allows the machine to "choose" among options at each step, modeling computations that involve guessing or exploration of alternatives. The concept of choice machines, precursors to modern NTMs, was first described by Alan Turing in his foundational 1936 paper on computable numbers. Formally, an NTM is accepted if at least one computation path reaches an accepting state, even if other paths reject or loop indefinitely; rejection occurs only if all paths reject.
Nondeterministic and deterministic Turing machines are equivalent in computational power, recognizing the same class of recursively enumerable languages. An NTM can simulate any deterministic Turing machine in polynomial time by treating the single deterministic transition as a singleton subset, requiring no additional overhead. Conversely, a deterministic Turing machine can simulate an NTM by exhaustively exploring all possible branches in a depth-first or breadth-first manner, maintaining a queue or stack of current configurations to track the computation tree; this simulation expands the state space to represent sets of possible NTM states (via a subset construction analogous to that for finite automata), but incurs an exponential time cost proportional to the branching factor raised to the length of the computation.
To illustrate nondeterminism, consider an NTM designed to guess and verify the middle position of an even-length input string w of length n over alphabet {0,1}, say to prepare for palindrome checking. Starting in initial state q_0 with the head at the leftmost symbol, the machine nondeterministically branches to guess the midpoint by moving right k steps (where k = n/2) while marking guessed positions, then reverses to compare symbols symmetrically. A sample computation trace for input w = 0101 (n=4, middle between positions 2 and 3) might proceed as follows:

Configuration 1: q_0, tape ... _ 0 1 0 1 _, head at first 0.

Branch A (wrong guess, moves right once): (q_0, 0) includes (q_mark, 0, R) Configuration 2A: q_mark, ... _ 0 1 0 1 _, head at first 1; then loops or rejects after mismatch.

Branch B (correct guess, moves right twice): From Config 1, (q_0, 0) also includes path to move R twice Configuration 2B: q_mid, ... _ 0 1 | 0 1 _, head at second 1 (marked | as middle); then branches to verify left/right matches, accepting if symmetric.

This branching allows efficient "guessing" of the middle without scanning the entire tape linearly in the worst case along accepting paths.
NTMs model idealized parallel computation, where branches represent simultaneous exploration of possibilities, akin to unbounded nondeterministic choice in search problems. They underpin the complexity class NP, defined as the set of decision problems solvable by an NTM in polynomial time, highlighting the P vs. NP question of whether deterministic polynomial-time solvability matches this nondeterministic power.

Multitape Turing machines

A multitape Turing machine is a variant of the standard Turing machine that employs multiple infinite tapes, each equipped with an independent read/write head that can move left or right. Formally, for a machine with kkk tapes, the components include a finite set of states QQQ, a tape alphabet \Gamma (including a blank symbol \sqcup), an initial state q0Qq_0 \in Qq0Q, a set of accepting states FQF \subseteq QFQ, and a transition function :QkQk{L,R}k\delta: Q \times \Gamma^k \to Q \times \Gamma^k \times \{L, R\}^k:QkQk{L,R}k. The input string is placed on the first tape with the head starting at the leftmost symbol, while the remaining tapes are initialized to blanks with their heads at the leftmost cell. At each step, the machine reads the symbols under all kkk heads, writes new symbols on each tape, moves each head left or right, and transitions to a new state based on \delta.
Despite the added tapes, multitape Turing machines recognize the same class of languages as single-tape machines, as any multitape machine can be simulated by a single-tape machine. The simulation encodes the contents of all kkk tapes onto a single tape using a larger alphabet, where segments for each tape are separated by special markers (e.g., #), and the positions of the heads are indicated by distinct symbols overlaid on the tape contents. To simulate one step of the multitape machine, the single-tape head scans the entire encoded configuration to read the current symbols under the virtual heads, computes the next configuration, and updates the encoding by rewriting the relevant parts. This process incurs an overhead, as each scan traverses a length proportional to the current tape usage.
Regarding complexity, if a multitape Turing machine decides a language in time T(n)T(n)T(n), its single-tape simulator runs in O(T(n)2)O(T(n)^2)O(T(n)2) time, since each of the T(n)T(n)T(n) multitape steps requires O(T(n))O(T(n))O(T(n)) single-tape steps to scan and update the encoding. Space complexity remains equivalent up to constants, as the simulation uses space linear in the multitape space usage. Conversely, multitape machines can simulate single-tape machines in linear time by dedicating one tape to the original tape's content.
An illustrative example is a two-tape Turing machine that copies its input string from the first tape to the second tape. Starting with the input www on tape 1 (head at the left end) and tape 2 blank (head at the start), the machine enters a loop: it reads the symbol on tape 1, writes the same symbol on tape 2, moves both heads right, and repeats until encountering a blank on tape 1. Upon reaching the blank, it moves both heads left to the beginning of www on tape 2 (or halts if verification is not needed), effectively duplicating the string in a single linear pass, which highlights the efficiency gain from parallel read/write operations unavailable in single-tape models.

Extensions

Oracle machines

An oracle machine, also known as an o-machine, extends the standard Turing machine by incorporating an external "oracle" that provides instantaneous answers to queries about membership in a fixed, undecidable set, enabling the exploration of relative computability. Introduced by Alan Turing to address limitations in solving certain number-theoretic problems, such as those equivalent to the halting problem, the oracle acts as a black box that decides predicates beyond the reach of ordinary computation. In Turing's formulation, the machine enters a designated query state (e.g., q4q_4q4) while the tape encodes a formula or instance; the oracle then determines its "duality" (truth value) and transitions the machine to a true state (q2q_2q2) or false state (q3q_3q3).
In the modern standardization, an oracle machine includes a dedicated read-only oracle tape alongside the standard work tape and control mechanism. The transition function \delta is augmented to allow writing a querytypically an index eee representing a decision instanceonto the oracle tape, followed by entering a query state; the oracle then appends a single bit (0 or 1) indicating the answer, which the machine reads to proceed. This setup preserves the Turing machine's finite states and tape alphabet but adds non-computable decision power, allowing the oracle machine to simulate any computation relative to the oracle set while querying it as needed. Configurations extend standard ones by including the oracle tape contents, with transitions unchanged except during oracle interactions.
Turing degrees formalize the comparative difficulty of sets under this relative computability, partitioning sets of natural numbers into equivalence classes where two sets AAA and BBB have the same degree if each is computable from an oracle machine using the other (ATBA \equiv_T BATB). A set CCC is Turing reducible to BBB (CTBC \leq_T BCTB) if an oracle machine with oracle BBB can compute CCC's characteristic function; the degree structure forms an upper semi-lattice under this reducibility, with the computable sets at degree 0\mathbf{0}0. The halting problem set $K = { e \mid $ the eee-th Turing machine halts on the empty tape}\}} defines the first non-trivial degree 0\mathbf{0}'0, the Turing jump of 0\mathbf{0}0; while KKK is undecidable by any standard Turing machine, an oracle machine with oracle KKK can decide membership in KKK.
A concrete example illustrates the power of the halting oracle: consider an oracle machine MMM that, on input eee (encoding a Turing machine TeT_eTe), writes eee to the oracle tape, enters the query state, and reads the oracle's response bit b{0,1}b \in \{0,1\}b{0,1} indicating whether TeT_eTe halts on blank tape (b=1b=1b=1) or not (b=0b=0b=0); MMM then accepts if b=1b=1b=1 and rejects otherwise. This single query suffices to decide the halting problem for blank tapes, a task undecidable without the oracle.
The iterated application of oracles generates the Turing jump hierarchy, where the jump of a degree d\mathbf{d}d is d\mathbf{d}'d, the degree of the halting problem relative to an oracle of degree d\mathbf{d}d. This yields a strict chain 0<0<0<\mathbf{0} < \mathbf{0}' < \mathbf{0}'' < \cdots0<0<0<, with each level capturing increasingly complex undecidability. The arithmetic hierarchy, classifying subsets of natural numbers by quantifier complexity in first-order arithmetic, aligns with this: a set is in n0\Sigma_n^0n0 (existential quantifiers dominating after n1n-1n1 alternations) if and only if it is recursively enumerable relative to the oracle 0(n1)0^{(n-1)}0(n1), the (n1)(n-1)(n1)-th jump of 0\mathbf{0}0; dually, n0\Pi_n^0n0 sets are co-recursively enumerable relative to the same oracle. This correspondence, established through oracle computations, reveals how finite oracle iterations capture the full arithmetical sets, beyond which lie the hyperarithmetic hierarchy.

Universal Turing machines

A universal Turing machine is a single Turing machine capable of simulating the behavior of any other Turing machine, given an appropriate encoding of that machine and its input. Introduced by Alan Turing in 1936, it serves as a foundational model demonstrating that all computable functions can be executed by one fixed device, provided the description of the target computation is supplied as input. This universality underscores the uniformity of computation, where the "program" for any task is treated as data on the machine's tape.
The encoding of a target Turing machine MMM and input www for the universal machine UUU typically uses a systematic scheme to represent states, symbols, transitions, and the input string in a finite alphabet, often binary or unary for compactness. States are numbered sequentially (e.g., from 0 to n1n-1n1 for nnn states) and represented in binary, prefixed with identifiers like "q" for regular states or specific markers for start and halt states. Symbols from the tape alphabet are similarly encoded in binary after a prefix such as "a", with the blank symbol as the zero representation. Transitions, which form the core of MMM's behavior, are encoded as quadruples or quintuples capturing the rule (q,a)=(p,b,D)\delta(q, a) = (p, b, D)(q,a)=(p,b,D), where qqq is the current state, aaa the read symbol, ppp the next state, bbb the write symbol, and DDD the head direction (left or right); these are serialized as concatenated binary strings separated by delimiters like 1's or blocks of 0's, often prefixed with unary counts for the total number of states, symbols, and transitions to define the machine's structure. The input www is appended after the machine description, separated by a marker such as #. Turing himself employed description numbers (D.N.) derived from sequences of symbols like D, A, and C to encode complete configurations, enabling numerical representation of states and instructions.
In the simulation process, UUU receives the encoded pair M,w\langle M, w \rangleM,w on its tape and interprets it step-by-step to mimic MMM's execution on www. UUU maintains an internal representation of MMM's tape, current state, and head positionoften using multiple tracks on its own tape for separationand iteratively scans the encoded transitions to find the matching rule based on MMM's current state and scanned symbol. Upon matching, UUU updates MMM's simulated tape by writing the specified symbol, moves the simulated head in the indicated direction, changes the state, and repeats until MMM reaches a halting state, at which point UUU also halts. If MMM enters a non-halting loop, UUU runs indefinitely. This direct emulation ensures UUU outputs the same result as MMM would, with the simulation typically requiring a constant factor more steps than MMM's original computation. For efficiency, multitape variants of UUU can accelerate the search for transitions by parallelizing tape access.
The existence of a universal Turing machine has profound implications for computability theory, establishing that a single machine suffices for all partial recursive functions and enabling key results like the undecidability of the halting problem through self-referential constructions, where a machine can simulate itself on encoded inputs. This universality also laid the groundwork for modern programmable computers, where software encodes the "machine" to be simulated.

Equivalence to other models

Relation to lambda calculus

The Church-Turing thesis posits that any effectively computable function on the natural numbers can be computed by a Turing machine or equivalently defined in the lambda calculus, establishing these models as interchangeable formalizations of computation. This thesis, proposed independently by Alonzo Church and Alan Turing in 1936, underscores their mutual capacity to capture the intuitive notion of mechanical procedures, with both systems defining the class of partial recursive functions.
To demonstrate equivalence, Turing machines can be encoded within the lambda calculus by representing the tape as a pair of lists (for left and right portions), symbols via Church encodings (e.g., booleans for binary alphabets), and states as higher-order functions that process the current configuration. The transition function is simulated through lambda terms that apply -reduction to update the tapeusing operations like cons for symbol insertion, successor for head movement, and function application for state changesthereby mimicking each machine step in a finite number of reductions. Conversely, lambda expressions are encoded as strings on a Turing machine tape, with -reduction simulated via tape manipulations that match and substitute subterms, allowing the machine to evaluate any lambda term.
The formal proof of equivalence relies on mutual interpretability: Turing showed in 1937 that every -definable function is computable by a Turing machine, and every Turing-computable function is -definable, with simulations preserving computability in finite steps. This aligns both models with the partial recursive functions, as established by Church and Kleene, confirming they enumerate the same class of effective procedures.

Post-Turing models

Post-Turing models encompass several abstract computational frameworks developed subsequent to Alan Turing's 1936 formulation, each proven to capture precisely the same class of computable partial functions as the Turing machine, thereby reinforcing the Church-Turing thesis without extending beyond its limits. These models vary in their conceptual foundationsranging from imperative register-based operations to functional constructionsyet all demonstrate mutual simulability, often through encoding techniques like Gdel numbering. Key examples include register machines, abacus models, and recursive function classes, which provide alternative lenses for understanding effective computability.
Register machines operate with a finite set of registers storing non-negative integers, supporting instructions to increment or decrement a register by 1 (the latter only if the register is non-zero), clear a register to zero, and conditionally branch based on whether a register is zero. Marvin Minsky proved in 1967 that even a machine with just two registers suffices to simulate any Turing machine, establishing Turing completeness for this model. The simulation encodes the Turing machine's tape contents as the exponent of the prime 2 (i.e., 2k2^k2k where kkk represents the tape symbols in binary) and the head position as the exponent of 3, using prime factorization properties to perform read/write/move operations via register arithmetic; for instance, extracting or modifying exponents mimics tape access without auxiliary storage beyond the registers.
Abacus models, formalized by John C. Shepherdson and Howard E. Sturgis in 1963 as unlimited register machines, extend the register paradigm by allowing an unbounded number of registers, each capable of holding arbitrarily large natural numbers. Basic instructions include incrementing a register, decrementing it if positive, zeroing it, copying contents from one register to another, and jumping conditionally on zero or unconditionally. These machines compute exactly the partial recursive functions, with equivalence to Turing machines shown through direct simulation: a Turing machine's tape and state can be represented in registers, and vice versa, preserving halting behavior. Time and space bounds in such simulations align closely with Turing machine resource usage, as register operations correspond linearly to tape steps in the encodings.
The recursive functions framework, developed by Stephen C. Kleene, builds the class of general recursive functions from base functionszero, successor, and projectionsusing composition and primitive recursion to form primitive recursive functions, then adjoining the -operator for unbounded minimization to handle non-total cases. Turing machines simulate recursive functions by encoding the function's definition (as a tree of compositions and recursions) into the tape alphabet and executing it via a step-by-step interpreter that applies the schemata; conversely, any Turing-computable function can be expressed recursively. This equivalence underscores the functional model's alignment with imperative computation.
Partial recursive functions extend the recursive class to include those where minimization may diverge, defining the domain as the set of inputs yielding defined outputsprecisely the partial functions computable by Turing machines. Equivalence follows from Kleene's normal form theorem, which posits a universal partial recursive function e(x)\phi_e(x)e(x) that, given index eee encoding a function and input xxx, computes it; this mirrors the universal Turing machine, allowing simulation in either direction via index-based encoding of programs.

Computability and limitations

Undecidability results

The halting problem, also known as the Entscheidungsproblem in its general form, asks whether there exists a Turing machine HHH that can decide, for any given Turing machine MMM and input www, whether MMM halts on www. No such Turing machine HHH exists, as proven by a diagonalization argument. Assume for contradiction that HHH exists and correctly outputs "halt" or "loop" for every pair M,w\langle M, w \rangleM,w, where M,w\langle M, w \rangleM,w is an encoding of MMM and www using a universal Turing machine. Construct a new machine MM'M that simulates HHH on M,\langle M', \epsilon \rangleM, (where \epsilon is the empty tape): if HHH says "halt," then MM'M loops forever; if "loop," then MM'M halts. This leads to a contradiction, as HHH cannot correctly classify MM'M on \epsilon. Thus, the halting problem is undecidable.
Rice's theorem generalizes this undecidability to semantic properties of Turing machines. It states that for any non-trivial property PPP of the language recognized by a Turing machinemeaning PPP holds for some but not all recursively enumerable languagesthere is no Turing machine that can decide whether an arbitrary Turing machine recognizes a language satisfying PPP. The proof reduces the halting problem to deciding PPP: given MMM and www, construct a machine MM'M that ignores its input, simulates MMM on www, and if it halts, accepts a fixed non-empty language L0L_0L0 with property PPP; otherwise, accepts the empty language (without PPP). Then, MM'M has property PPP if and only if MMM halts on www, making the decision undecidable. For example, determining whether the language of a Turing machine is infinite is undecidable by Rice's theorem.
The Busy Beaver function (n)\Sigma(n)(n) exemplifies a non-computable function arising from Turing machine limitations. Defined as the maximum number of steps taken by any halting Turing machine with nnn states and two symbols on a blank tape, (n)\Sigma(n)(n) grows faster than any computable function. To see its non-computability, note that a machine computing (n)\Sigma(n)(n) could solve the halting problem for nnn-state machines by simulating all such machines up to (n)\Sigma(n)(n) steps, which is impossible. Thus, (n)\Sigma(n)(n) is uncomputable, highlighting the intrinsic bounds on what Turing machines can quantify about their own class. Known values include (1)=1\Sigma(1) = 1(1)=1, (2)=6\Sigma(2) = 6(2)=6, (3)=21\Sigma(3) = 21(3)=21, (4)=107\Sigma(4) = 107(4)=107, and (5)=47,176,870\Sigma(5) = 47{,}176{,}870(5)=47,176,870, but values for larger nnn (such as n>5n > 5n>5) remain elusive due to undecidability.
The Post correspondence problem (PCP) provides another fundamental undecidable problem, simpler in formulation yet equivalent in power to the halting problem. Given two lists of strings over an alphabet {a,b}\{a, b\}{a,b}, say top list u1,,uku_1, \dots, u_ku1,,uk and bottom list v1,,vkv_1, \dots, v_kv1,,vk, the PCP asks whether there exists a sequence of indices i1,,imi_1, \dots, i_mi1,,im (with repetitions allowed) such that the concatenation ui1uim=vi1vimu_{i_1} \cdots u_{i_m} = v_{i_1} \cdots v_{i_m}ui1uim=vi1vim. PCP is undecidable, proven by reduction from the halting problem: for a machine MMM and input www, encode the computation of MMM on www into string lists where a solution corresponds to a halting computation path matching symbol by symbol. If no solution exists, the simulation loops indefinitely. This reduction shows PCP's undecidability without relying on Turing machine encodings directly.

Complexity classes

Complexity classes in the theory of Turing machines focus on the resources required for decidable computations, particularly time and space bounds on deterministic and nondeterministic machines. These classes categorize problems based on the computational effort needed to solve them, providing a framework to understand the relative difficulty of decision problems within the realm of computability. Resource-bounded Turing machines limit the number of steps (time) or tape cells (space) used during computation, enabling the study of efficient versus intractable problems among those that halt.
Time complexity classes measure the steps a Turing machine takes to decide a language. The class DTIME(f(n)) consists of all languages decidable by a deterministic Turing machine in O(f(n)) steps on inputs of length n, where f is a time-constructible function. The class P, or polynomial time, is the union over all constants k of DTIME(n^k), capturing problems solvable efficiently in time polynomial in the input size.
Space complexity classes analogously bound the tape usage. DSPACE(f(n)) includes languages decidable by a deterministic Turing machine using O(f(n)) space. PSPACE is the union over k of DSPACE(n^k), encompassing problems solvable with polynomial space, though potentially exponential time.
Nondeterministic time and space classes extend these definitions to nondeterministic Turing machines, which, as described in the section on nondeterministic Turing machines, allow multiple computation paths. NTIME(f(n)) comprises languages accepted by such machines in O(f(n)) steps on some accepting path. NPSPACE is the polynomial-space analog for nondeterministic machines. By Savitch's theorem, NPSPACE equals PSPACE, showing that nondeterminism does not increase power beyond quadratic space overhead for space-bounded computations.
Hierarchy theorems establish strict inclusions among these classes, demonstrating that more resources enable solving strictly harder problems. The deterministic time hierarchy theorem states that if f(n) log f(n) = o(g(n)) for time-constructible f and g, then DTIME(f(n)) is a proper subset of DTIME(g(n)); for example, TIME(n) \subsetneq TIME(n \log n). Similar hierarchies hold for space and nondeterministic time. These results imply separations like P \subsetneq EXPTIME, but leave open whether P = NP, as nondeterministic polynomial time might collapse the polynomial hierarchy if equal to deterministic polynomial time.

Comparison to real computation

Digital computers

Digital computers, particularly those following the von Neumann architecture, exhibit key conceptual similarities to the Turing machine model of computation. The central processing unit (CPU) operates as a finite state control mechanism, akin to the Turing machine's finite set of states, which determines the next action based on the current state and input symbol. Similarly, random access memory (RAM) approximates the Turing machine's tape by providing a linear addressable space for storing and retrieving data and instructions, though in a finite capacity. Programs executed on these computers can be regarded as encoded versions of the Turing machine's transition table, specifying state changes, symbol writes, and head movements in a deterministic manner.
Despite these parallels, significant differences arise from the theoretical nature of Turing machines versus the practical constraints of digital hardware. A standard Turing machine assumes an infinite tape for memory, enabling computations of arbitrary length without resource exhaustion, whereas digital computers rely on finite memory, which imposes hard limits on the size and duration of executable programs. Additionally, access to the Turing machine's tape is strictly sequential, requiring the read/write head to move step-by-step along the tape, in contrast to the random access capability of RAM in von Neumann architectures, where data can be addressed and retrieved directly regardless of position.
The notion of Turing completeness bridges these models by establishing that any sufficiently powerful digital computer can emulate a Turing machine. Programming languages such as C++ are Turing-complete, meaning they possess the expressive power to simulate any Turing machine computation, provided unlimited time and memory are availablethough real implementations are bounded by hardware. A universal Turing machine further underscores this equivalence, as it can interpret and execute the description of any other Turing machine, mirroring how digital computers run arbitrary software.
In contemporary computing, Turing machines retain relevance by abstracting away hardware specifics, enabling the theoretical analysis of algorithms and their efficiency without regard to implementation details like processor speed or memory hierarchy. This focus on computational limits and universality makes the model indispensable for understanding what is fundamentally computable on digital systems.

Hypercomputation critiques

Hypercomputation refers to theoretical models of computation that purportedly exceed the capabilities of Turing machines by solving undecidable problems, such as the halting problem. These models often invoke idealized physical or mathematical constructs to achieve super-Turing power, but they face significant critiques regarding their physical realizability. Critics argue that such systems violate fundamental physical laws, including those governing time, energy, and information processing, thereby extending the Church-Turing thesis to assert that no physically feasible device can surpass Turing computability.
One prominent example is the infinite-time Turing machine (ITTM), which extends standard Turing machines by allowing computation to proceed through transfinite ordinal time, performing limit steps at limit ordinals to update tape cells based on previous values. Introduced by Hamkins and Lewis, ITTMs can compute functions beyond Turing machines, such as the truth predicate for arithmetic. However, critiques highlight their physical impossibility, as they require infinite duration or unattainable precision in state tracking, contradicting relativistic constraints on time and causality.
Malament-Hogarth spacetimes propose hypercomputation via relativistic effects, where a computer follows a worldline allowing infinite proper time (experienced by the device) while an observer's coordinate time remains finite, potentially enabling acausal signaling near black holes or wormholes. Earman and Norton explored this in the context of supertasks, suggesting it could solve undecidable problems through infinite steps in finite external time. Yet, such spacetimes are deemed physically unrealizable due to violations of global hyperbolicity, the cosmic censorship hypothesis, and the absence of stable configurations permitting infinite computation without singularities or energy divergences.
Analog computers, particularly those modeled as continuous dynamical systems with real-number inputs acting as oracles, represent another hypercomputation proposal. Siegelmann's neural network models, using real weights and activations, claim to compute non-recursive functions by exploiting the uncountable precision of real numbers. Critiques, notably from Davis, contend that these rely on unphysically precise real-number oracles, which cannot exist due to quantum noise, finite energy, and the no-cloning theorem preventing perfect measurement or replication of quantum states encoding reals.
Zeno machines, which perform infinitely many steps in finite time by accelerating computations supertask-style (e.g., halving intervals like Zeno's paradox), offer a related model for hypercomputation. Potgieter reviewed their formal properties, showing potential for non-Turing outputs. Physical critiques emphasize impossibility: achieving infinite steps demands unbounded acceleration, violating the speed of light, and requires infinite energy or precision, bounded by thermodynamic and quantum limits.
The Church-Turing thesis, when extended to physical systems, posits that effective computation is limited to Turing-equivalent processes, reinforced by the lack of empirical evidence for hyperdevices despite extensive physical exploration. No observed phenomena, from particle accelerators to cosmological data, suggest mechanisms enabling super-Turing operations. An ongoing debate concerns quantum computing, which provides probabilistic speedups (e.g., via Shor's algorithm) but remains equivalent to probabilistic Turing machines, not hypercomputation, due to unitary evolution and measurement constraints.

Historical development

Precursors and Entscheidungsproblem

In the 19th century, early precursors to modern computational concepts emerged through mechanical and logical innovations. Charles Babbage's Analytical Engine, designed starting in 1837, represented a programmable mechanical device capable of performing arbitrary calculations via punched cards for input and control, analogous to a rudimentary Turing machine in its separation of storage and processing. Complementing this, George Boole developed an algebraic treatment of logic in works such as The Mathematical Analysis of Logic (1847) and The Laws of Thought (1854), where he represented logical propositions using symbolic equations with operations like addition for disjunction and multiplication for conjunction, treating logic as a branch of mathematics governed by idempotent laws such as x2=xx^2 = xx2=x.
These ideas gained formal momentum in the early 20th century amid efforts to rigorize mathematics. In 1900, David Hilbert presented 23 problems at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris, the tenth of which sought an algorithm to determine, for any Diophantine equation with integer coefficients, whether it has integer solutions. The Entscheidungsproblemthe challenge of devising an algorithm to determine the validity of any statement in first-order predicate logicwas a distinct issue in Hilbert's program for mechanizing mathematics; it was refined in Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann's 1928 textbook to focus on deciding whether a first-order formula is universally valid or satisfiable through finite steps, underscoring Hilbert's vision for a complete, consistent foundation of mathematics.
Early attempts to address such foundational issues included Thoralf Skolem's work on primitive recursive functions in the 1920s. In his 1923 paper, Skolem informally defined a class of functions built from basic operations (successor, projection, constant zero) via composition and primitive recursion, such as the predecessor function p(0)=0p(0) = 0p(0)=0, p(Sx)=xp(Sx) = xp(Sx)=x, and relations like divisibility, aiming to formalize arithmetic without impredicative definitions. These functions were limited to total computable ones that always terminate, excluding more general recursive functions like the Ackermann function, thus providing only a subclass of effectively calculable operations.
A pivotal blow to Hilbert's optimism came with Kurt Gdel's 1931 incompleteness theorems, which employed diagonalization to reveal inherent limitations in formal systems. In his paper "On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems," Gdel constructed self-referential sentences via arithmetization, showing that any consistent system extending Robinson arithmetic contains undecidable statements, such as a Gdel sentence asserting its own unprovability: G\Prov(G)G \leftrightarrow \neg \Prov(\ulcorner G \urcorner)G\Prov(G). The second theorem extended this to prove that such a system cannot establish its own consistency, profoundly influencing later undecidability results by demonstrating that no single formal system could capture all mathematical truths.

Turing's 1936 paper

Alan Turing's seminal paper, "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem," was received by the London Mathematical Society on 28 May 1936 and read on 12 November 1936, appearing in the Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society in 1937. Alonzo Church reviewed the paper positively in the Journal of Symbolic Logic in 1937, noting its rigorous formalization of computation. Turing developed the concept independently by modeling the step-by-step processes of human computation akin to pencil-and-paper calculations on an unlimited sheet, inspired by Max Newman's 1935 lectures on the foundations of mathematics where he first encountered Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem; this mechanistic approach led to the formulation of an abstract machine featuring an infinite tape, read-write head, and finite states governed by a transition table. The work was motivated by David Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem, which asked whether there exists an algorithm to determine the truth of any statement in first-order logic; Turing reduced this to the question of whether a machine ever halts on a given input, showing undecidability.
The paper's structure begins with an analogy to human computation, likening a human calculator to a machine with a limited set of states and an unlimited paper tape for recording symbols. Turing introduces "a-machines" (automatic machines), which are deterministic devices operating on an infinite tape divided into squares, each holding a symbol from a finite alphabet. These machines have a finite number of "m-configurations" representing internal states and move left or right based solely on the current configuration and scanned symbol, ensuring deterministic behavior without loops unless explicitly designed. Computable real numbers are defined as those whose infinite binary decimals can be generated by such a circle-free (non-looping) a-machine, allowing arbitrary precision through the tape's unbounded extent.
Key innovations include the infinite tape, which enables handling sequences of arbitrary length without predefined bounds, contrasting with finite automata. Turing sketches the concept of a "universal machine" capable of simulating any other a-machine given its table of instructions as input on the tape, laying groundwork for programmable computation. To prove undecidability, he employs a diagonal argument on the enumeration of all possible a-machines: assuming a machine D that decides if another halts leads to a contradiction by constructing a machine that does the opposite of D's prediction on its own description. This demonstrates that not all reals are computable and resolves the Entscheidungsproblem negatively.

Post-1936 impacts

Following Alan Turing's seminal 1936 paper, his ideas profoundly influenced practical computing developments during and after World War II. From 1939 to 1945, Turing worked at Bletchley Park, where he contributed to codebreaking efforts using early electromechanical devices, gaining hands-on experience with automated computation that informed his later designs. In 1945, shortly after the war, Turing proposed the Automatic Computing Engine (ACE) at the National Physical Laboratory, an electronic stored-program computer directly inspired by his universal machine concept and wartime machinery like the Colossus. This design emphasized simplicity and efficiency, aiming to execute any computable function via programmable instructions, and laid groundwork for subsequent British computers such as the Pilot ACE, operational by 1950.
John von Neumann's 1945 "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC" similarly reflected Turing's theoretical framework, incorporating ideas of universal computation in its architecture for a stored-program electronic discrete variable computer, though without explicit reference to Turing machines; Turing himself cited the EDVAC report in his ACE proposal, bridging theory and engineering. These efforts marked the transition from abstract models to realizable hardware, establishing Turing machines as a foundational benchmark for digital computer design in the late 1940s.
In the 1950s and 1960s, Turing machines became central to the emerging field of theoretical computer science, particularly through formalizations in recursion theory. Stephen Kleene's 1952 book Introduction to Metamathematics equated recursive functions with Turing-computable ones, providing a rigorous framework for effective computability and influencing subsequent developments in proof theory and logic. Hartley Rogers Jr.'s 1967 monograph Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability further systematized the field, using Turing machines to define degrees of unsolvability and explore the hierarchy of recursive functions, solidifying their role in analyzing algorithmic limitations. During this period, researchers also investigated minimal configurations, such as Marvin Minsky's 1967 demonstration of a 7-state, 4-symbol universal Turing machine, and later efforts toward even smaller variants, exemplified by the 2-state, 3-symbol machine proposed by Stephen Wolfram in 2002 and proven universal in 2007. These constructions highlighted the compactness of universal computation, spurring studies on the boundaries of mechanical describability.
From the 1970s onward, Turing machines permeated algorithms education and advanced theoretical extensions. Standard textbooks, such as Michael Sipser's Introduction to the Theory of Computation (first edition 1997), dedicate chapters to Turing machines as the canonical model for computability and complexity, using them to introduce undecidability and nondeterminism. Similarly, Thomas Cormen et al.'s Introduction to Algorithms (first edition 1990) references Turing machines in discussions of computational models, underscoring their ubiquity in curricula. In theoretical advancements, David Deutsch's 1985 paper introduced the quantum Turing machine, a probabilistic extension allowing superposition and entanglement to model quantum computation, which extends classical universality while enabling exponential speedups for certain problems. Concurrently, Tibor Rad's 1962 busy beaver functiondefined via the maximum steps or output of halting n-state Turing machinesspawned ongoing competitions to compute its values, illustrating non-computable growth rates and challenging automated verification; for instance, the 5-state case was resolved in 2024 after exhaustive analysis confirming 47,176,870 steps as the maximum, while the 6-state case remains unresolved with values exceeding 101510 \uparrow\uparrow 151015.
In recent decades, Turing machines have informed cryptographic proofs and alternative computing paradigms without supplanting the classical model. Shafi Goldwasser, Silvio Micali, and Charles Rackoff's 1985 paper defined zero-knowledge proofs using interactive Turing machines, enabling verifiers to confirm statements (e.g., graph non-isomorphism) without gaining additional knowledge, a cornerstone of secure protocols like those in blockchain. Applications briefly leverage universal Turing machines for simulation in such systems. No fundamental paradigm shifts have emerged, but refinements appear in unconventional substrates; for example, Andrew Currin et al.'s 2016 design and in vitro implementation of a nondeterministic universal Turing machine using DNA strand displacement and polymerase chain reactions demonstrates potential for solving NP-complete problems biochemically, bridging complexity theory with molecular computing. These developments reaffirm Turing machines' enduring analytical power across domains.

References

 ON COMPUTABLE NUMBERS, WITH AN APPLICATION TO THE ...

 Turing Machines and Computability - OSU Math Department

 6 Turing Machines

http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/Turing_Paper_1936.pdf

Turing machines - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Turing Machines: Examples

 Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 3rd ed.

 Formal Languages, Automata and Computation Turing Machines

https://doi.org/10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230

 Turing Machines

Turing Machines and State Transition Diagrams

 Turing machines Group work - compsci.ie

The Busy Beaver Challenge - bbchallenge

 1 Turing Machines and Effective Computability

 An ACL2 Proof of the Turing Equivalence of M1 J Strother Moore

 Computability

 9 Nondeterministic Turing Machines - Jeff Erickson

 Turing Machines - Stanford University

 The Complexity of Theorem-Proving Procedures

 Lecture 13: Time Complexity - People | MIT CSAIL

Turing Machines: Examples

 Systems of logic based on ordinals (Proc. Lond. Math. Soc., series 2 ...

 arXiv:2112.03677v7 12 Nov 2023

Recursively enumerable sets of positive integers and their decision ...

 The Turing Degrees: Global and Local Structure - Cornell Mathematics

 RECURSIVE PREDICATES AND QUANTIFIERSC1) - PhilPapers

 Turing Machine Variations - Rose-Hulman

 An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory Alonzo ...

 -Calculus: The Other Turing Machine

 COMPUTABILITY AND -DEFINABILITY - Cloudinary

 Recursive Unsolvability of Post's Problem of "Tag" and other Topics ...

Computability of Recursive Functions | Journal of the ACM

Introduction to Metamathematics: Stephen Cole Kleene, Michael ...

 On Non-Computable Functions - Gwern.net

A VARIANT OF A RECURSIVELY UNSOLVABLE PROBLEM

 On the Computational Complexity of Algorithms Author(s)

 A Short History of Computational Complexity - Lance Fortnow

Relationships between nondeterministic and deterministic tape ...

Turing Machines - ArielOrtiz.info

 Introduction 1 Course Overview 2 Machine Model - cs.wisc.edu

Chapter 1. Models of Computation - Zoo | Yale University

 Lecture 5: Computational Models 1 Motivation 2 Turing Machines

Turing Completeness

Hypercomputation and the Physical ChurchTuring Thesis

Practical intractability: a critique of the hypercomputation movement

Infinite Time Turing Machines: Supertask Computation - math - arXiv

The Extent of Computation in MalamentHogarth Spacetimes

Analog computation via neural networks - ScienceDirect.com

(PDF) The Myth of Hypercomputation - ResearchGate

 Zeno machines and hypercomputation - arXiv

Quantum HypercomputationHype or Computation?

Charles Babbage: His Life and Contributions

George Boole - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

 Mathematical Problems

The Rise and Fall of the Entscheidungsproblem

Recursive Functions - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Gdel's Incompleteness Theorems

 Alan Turing, Enigma, and the Breaking of German Machine Ciphers ...

 Alan Turing Computer Designer

Turing's Main Hardware Design After World War II, the Automatic ...

10 First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC (1945) - IEEE Xplore

 Lessons from a 1946 Computer Design Turing and ACE

 Kleene's amazing second recursion theorem.

Four Small Universal Turing Machines | Request PDF - ResearchGate

 Lecture 1 1 Turing Machines - UMD Computer Science

 Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the universal ...

 Implementing a nondeterministic universal Turing machine using DNA

Alan Turing Internet Scrapbook - 1935
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion