VBScript Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
VBScript
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 VBScript, or Visual Basic Scripting Edition, is a lightweight, interpreted scripting language developed by Microsoft as a subset of the Visual Basic programming language, introduced in 1996 to enable task automation, application control, and dynamic web content creation on Windows platforms.
It supports interaction with Component Object Model (COM) objects, allowing scripts to manipulate files, registries, and system components through the Windows Script Host (WSH), a host environment bundled with Windows for executing standalone scripts. VBScript also powers server-side logic in Active Server Pages (ASP) for generating dynamic web pages on Microsoft IIS servers, where it processes HTML-embedded code to interact with databases and handle user inputs. On the client side, it was integrated with Internet Explorer for enhancing web page interactivity, such as form validation and UI effects, though limited to Microsoft's ecosystem.
Key features include a familiar syntax for Visual Basic developers, with support for variables, loops, conditional statements, error handling via On Error Resume Next, and object-oriented elements like late binding, but it lacks advanced features like classes or strong typing found in full Visual Basic. Designed for ease of use in administrative and web tasks, VBScript runs without compilation, making it suitable for rapid prototyping, though its security modelrelying on host permissionshas led to vulnerabilities exploited in malware.
Despite its historical role in Windows scripting and early web development, Microsoft deprecated VBScript in October 2023, citing modern alternatives like PowerShell for automation and JavaScript for web tasks; it remains available as a Features on Demand (FOD) in Windows 11 version 24H2 and later, but will be disabled by default around 2027 and fully removed from future releases. Developers are encouraged to migrate scripts to these successors to ensure compatibility and security.

History

Origins and Development

VBScript was developed by Microsoft in the mid-1990s as a lightweight scripting language, serving as a subset of Visual Basic for Applications to leverage existing Visual Basic skills in web environments. Its primary purpose was to support client-side scripting in Internet Explorer 3.0, complementing Microsoft's JScripta proprietary implementation of JavaScriptand enabling developers to create more dynamic and interactive web content without requiring full programming expertise.
Key influences on VBScript included the familiar, English-like syntax of Visual Basic, which made it approachable for non-programmers seeking to add quick interactivity to web pages. To address security concerns in a browser context, Microsoft deliberately stripped features such as direct file input/output operations, clipboard access, and memory management, rendering it safer for client-side execution compared to full Visual Basic.
VBScript was integrated with the release of Internet Explorer 3.0 in August 1996, positioning it as a strategic tool in the escalating browser wars to rival Netscape's JavaScript dominance. As part of Microsoft's ActiveX initiative, it facilitated interaction with ActiveX controls and Java applets, driving early adoption by promoting richer, Windows-integrated web experiences for enterprise and intranet applications. Over time, VBScript evolved to support server-side scripting in Active Server Pages (ASP), expanding its utility beyond the browser.

Versions and Milestones

VBScript version 1.0 was released in 1996 alongside Internet Explorer 3.0, introducing basic scripting support with core functions such as Abs and Date, standard operators, and control structures like If...Then and For...Next. This initial version positioned VBScript as a lightweight companion to Visual Basic for client-side web scripting within Microsoft's browser ecosystem.
Version 2.0 followed in 1996, enhancing compatibility with Visual Basic by adding error handling mechanisms, array support, constants, and expanded date/time functions like DateAdd. These updates made VBScript more robust for both client-side and emerging server-side applications, particularly with Internet Information Server 3.0.
Subsequent releases built on this foundation: version 3.0 in 1997 with Internet Explorer 4.0 and IIS 4.0 introduced the Debug object and Stop statement for improved debugging. Version 4.0 arrived in 1998 alongside Visual Studio 6.0, focusing on stability without major new language elements. Version 5.0, released in 1999 with Internet Explorer 5.0, marked a significant milestone by adding class support for object-oriented programming, the Eval function, and regular expressions via the RegExp object. Versions 5.1 and 5.5 in 1999 and 2000 supported Internet Explorer 5.01, Windows 2000, and Windows ME, with 5.5 introducing the SubMatches collection for regex enhancements. Version 5.6 in 2001, tied to Internet Explorer 6.0 and Windows XP, provided performance improvements and better integration with the evolving Windows environment.
The final stable release, version 5.8, occurred in 2010 as part of security updates for Windows systems, with no substantive language additions thereafter.
Key milestones include the 1998 integration of VBScript with the Windows Script Host upon Windows 98's launch, enabling execution of scripts outside web contexts for system automation. Early adoption in Active Server Pages (ASP) from 1996 onward established VBScript as a standard for server-side scripting in Microsoft web technologies. Post-2010, development stagnated as Microsoft prioritized .NET frameworks and modern scripting alternatives like PowerShell.
VersionRelease YearKey Host ApplicationsNotable Additions
1.01996Internet Explorer 3.0Basic functions, operators, control structures
2.01996IIS 3.0Arrays, constants, error handling, date/time functions
3.01997IE 4.0, IIS 4.0Debug object, Stop statement
4.01998Visual Studio 6.0Stability enhancements
5.01999IE 5.0Classes, Eval, regular expressions
5.11999IE 5.01, Windows 2000Minor compatibility updates
5.52000IE 5.5, Windows MESubMatches for regex
5.62001IE 6.0, Windows XPPerformance improvements
5.82010Windows updatesSecurity fixes (final release)

Language Features

Core Syntax

VBScript is a case-insensitive programming language, meaning keywords, variable names, and other identifiers can be written in any case without affecting functionality, much like its parent language Visual Basic.
Comments in VBScript are denoted by a single quote (') placed at the start of a line or after executable code on the same line, allowing explanatory notes that the interpreter ignores. Multi-line comments are not supported natively, requiring a separate comment indicator for each line.
Variable declaration is optional and uses the Dim statement to allocate storage and specify names, though it is recommended to declare variables explicitly for clarity and error prevention. Variable names must begin with a letter, followed by letters, digits, or underscores, and are limited to 255 characters in length. All variables are handled through the Variant data type, which dynamically accommodates different kinds of data. Constants can be declared using the Const statement, e.g., Const Pi = 3.14159, which defines read-only values at script start.
Statements in VBScript conclude at the end of a line, with no need for semicolons as terminators; multiple statements can appear on one line separated by colons (:), and long statements can continue onto the next line using an underscore (_) preceded by a space.
The Option Explicit directive, placed at the beginning of a script, requires all variables to be declared before use, helping to avoid runtime errors from misspelled or unintended variable names.
A basic VBScript program consists simply of a sequence of executable statements processed from top to bottom, without requiring a designated main function or entry point.
For runtime error handling, the On Error Resume Next statement enables the script to continue execution after an error occurs, suppressing default error dialogs and allowing manual checks via the Err object, while On Error Goto 0 disables this behavior.

Data Types and Operators

VBScript utilizes a single fundamental data type called the Variant, which serves as a flexible container capable of storing and adapting to various forms of data without requiring explicit type declarations for variables. This design simplifies scripting by allowing automatic type inference based on assigned values, making VBScript lightweight for automation tasks within Microsoft environments. All variables in VBScript are Variants, and the runtime engine handles the underlying storage and operations accordingly. Arrays are also supported as Variant arrays, declared with Dim (e.g., Dim arr(5) for fixed-size or Dim arr() for dynamic) and resized using ReDim (e.g., ReDim arr(10); ReDim Preserve arr(20) to retain data). Arrays are zero-based by default, with elements accessed via indices like arr(0). Multi-dimensional arrays use commas, e.g., Dim matrix(2,3).
The Variant supports several subtypes that determine the specific nature of the data it holds, each with defined storage and value ranges. These subtypes include Empty (uninitialized state), Null (indicating invalid or unknown data), Boolean (True or False), Byte (unsigned 8-bit integer), Integer (signed 16-bit integer), Long (signed 32-bit integer), Single (32-bit floating-point), Double (64-bit floating-point), Currency (64-bit scaled integer for financial calculations), Date (64-bit floating-point representing dates and times), String (variable-length Unicode text), Object (reference to COM automation objects), and Error (numeric error codes). The following table summarizes these subtypes, their storage sizes, and value ranges:
SubtypeStorage SizeValue Range or Description
Empty0 bytesUninitialized Variant.
NullVariesNo valid data.
Boolean2 bytesTrue (-1) or False (0).
Byte1 byte0 to 255.
Integer2 bytes-32,768 to 32,767.
Long4 bytes-2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.
Single4 bytes-3.402823E38 to -1.401298E-45 for negative; 1.401298E-45 to 3.402823E38 for positive (approximately).
Double8 bytes-1.79769313486232E308 to -4.94065645841247E-324 for negative; 4.94065645841247E-324 to 1.79769313486232E308 for positive (approximately).
Currency8 bytes-922,337,203,685,477.5808 to 922,337,203,685,477.5807.
Date8 bytesJanuary 1, 100 to December 31, 9999 (as double-precision floating-point).
StringVaries + 2 bytes per characterVariable-length Unicode strings up to 2^31-1 characters.
ObjectVariesPointer to COM object.
Error4 bytes + INTUser-defined error codes.
These subtypes are identified using the VarType function, which returns a numeric constant corresponding to each (e.g., vbInteger for 2, vbString for 8), and the TypeName function provides a string representation like "Integer" or "String".
Type conversion in VBScript occurs implicitly during operations when subtypes are mixed, but explicit conversion is recommended for precision using built-in functions such as CStr (to String), CInt (to Integer), CLng (to Long), CSng (to Single), CDbl (to Double), CDate (to Date), CCur (to Currency), and CBool (to Boolean). For instance, CInt("123") converts the string "123" to the Integer subtype 123, raising an error if the value exceeds the subtype's range. The IsEmpty, IsNull, and IsObject functions test for specific states or subtypes without conversion.
VBScript provides arithmetic operators for numeric operations on Variant subtypes treated as numbers: + (addition), - (subtraction or negation), * (multiplication), / (floating-point division), \ (integer division, truncating toward zero), Mod (modulo, remainder of integer division), and ^ (exponentiation). These operators promote operands to appropriate numeric subtypes as needed, with precedence following standard mathematical order (e.g., ^ highest, then * and /, followed by + and -; use parentheses for grouping). For example, 5 \ 2 yields 2 (Integer division), while 5 Mod 2 yields 1.
Comparison operators evaluate equality and relational order between Variants, performing type coercion if necessary: = (equal), <> (not equal), < (less than), > (greater than), <= (less than or equal), >= (greater than or equal), and Is (object reference equality, without value comparison). String comparisons are case-insensitive by default and use locale-specific collation; numeric comparisons convert strings to numbers if possible. For object references, Is checks identity rather than content. An example is If x = y Then ..., which returns True if both evaluate to the same value after coercion.
Logical operators perform bitwise and Boolean operations on numeric or Boolean Variants: And (bitwise AND or logical conjunction), Or (bitwise OR or logical disjunction), Not (bitwise negation or logical NOT), Xor (bitwise exclusive OR or logical exclusive disjunction), Eqv (bitwise equivalence), and Imp (bitwise implication). Unlike some languages, VBScript evaluates both operands fully without short-circuiting, potentially leading to side effects or errors if the second operand is invalid. For Boolean use, non-zero values coerce to True and zero to False; e.g., If a And b Then ... is True only if both are non-zero.
For strings, the primary concatenation operator is &, which reliably joins two Variants treated as strings without ambiguity: result = "Hello" & " World". The + operator can also concatenate but may interpret operands as numbers if possible, leading to unexpected arithmetic results (e.g., "2" + "3" yields 5 instead of "23"); thus, & is preferred to avoid precedence issues with arithmetic operators. The & operator handles Null by treating it as an empty string during concatenation.

Control Flow and Procedures

VBScript provides standard control flow constructs for conditional execution and iteration, enabling scripts to make decisions and repeat operations based on runtime conditions. These include branching statements like If...Then...Else and Select Case, as well as looping mechanisms such as Do...Loop and For...Next variants. Additionally, procedures allow for code modularization through Sub and Function declarations, supporting parameter passing to promote reusability without support for advanced scoping like classes or modules.

Conditionals

The If...Then...Else statement evaluates a condition and executes one or more statements accordingly. In its block form, it begins with If condition Then, followed by optional ElseIf clauses, an optional Else block, and ends with End If; the condition must evaluate to a Boolean value, where True executes the associated statements, and evaluation proceeds sequentially until a match or the Else is reached. Single-line syntax, If condition Then statements , is suitable for simple cases but limits multiple statements to semicolon-separated format. Nested If statements are supported, each requiring its own End If.
For multi-way branching, the Select Case statement compares a test expression against multiple cases more efficiently than nested Ifs. Its syntax is Select Case testexpression followed by one or more Case expressionlist blocks, an optional Case Else, and End Select; the testexpression can be numeric or string, and expressionlist supports comma-separated values, ranges (e.g., 1 To 5), or relations (e.g., >=10). The first matching Case executes its statements, with Case Else handling non-matches; nesting is allowed with matching End Select. An example is:
Select Case dayOfWeek
 Case 1: weekday = "Monday"
 Case 2: weekday = "Tuesday"
 Case Else: weekday = "Weekend"
End Select
This avoids verbose ElseIf chains for several alternatives.

Loops

VBScript offers flexible looping constructs to repeat code blocks. The Do...Loop statement iterates while or until a condition holds, with variants placing the condition at the start (Do While condition ... Loop or Do Until condition ... Loop, checking before iteration) or end (Do ... Loop While condition or Do ... Loop Until condition, executing at least once). The condition is a Boolean expression; Until inverts the logic of While (i.e., loops while False for Until). Nesting is common, and loops can contain other control structures.
The For...Next loop repeats for a fixed number of iterations using a counter variable. Syntax is For counter = start To end statements Next, where counter initializes to start, increments by step (default 1, can be negative), and continues while approaching end inclusively; if step is negative, end must be less than start. For example:
For i = 1 To 5 Step 2
 MsgBox i ' Outputs 1, 3, 5
Next
This is ideal for known iteration counts. The For Each...Next variant iterates over elements in an array or collection without indexing: For Each item In group statements Next, assigning each element to item sequentially; it requires at least one element to enter and supports nesting if items are unique.

Exit Statements

To terminate loops prematurely, VBScript includes Exit Do and Exit For statements. Exit Do immediately exits the innermost Do...Loop, transferring control to the statement following Loop, and can appear multiple times within a loop, often conditioned by an If. Similarly, Exit For exits the innermost For...Next, skipping remaining iterations; both support nested loops by affecting only the immediate enclosing one. These provide essential early termination without relying on flags or GoTo.

Procedures

Procedures in VBScript organize code into reusable blocks, declared globally within the script without module or class support. The Sub statement defines a void procedure: Sub name statements End Sub, where arglist is param ; all parameters are implicitly Variants. ByRef is default, passing the parameter's reference for modification, while ByVal passes a copy to protect the original. VBScript does not support optional parameters natively or type specifications; optional behavior must be simulated using functions like IsMissing. Subs perform actions without return values. Functions declare return-capable procedures: Function name statements name = returnvalue End Function, assigning the return via the function name; they can be used in expressions. Scope is script-wide, with all procedures accessible from anywhere.
To invoke, the Call keyword is optional for Subs (e.g., SubRoutine arg1 or Call SubRoutine(arg1)), but parentheses force ByVal if omitted otherwise; for Functions, assign or use in expressions (e.g., result = MyFunction(arg)). Parameters match by position. An example Sub with parameters:
Sub Greet(ByVal name)
 MsgBox "Hello, " & name
End Sub
Call Greet("World") ' Outputs: Hello, World
This promotes modularity, though VBScript lacks advanced features like overloading.

COM and Object Manipulation

VBScript integrates seamlessly with the Component Object Model (COM), allowing scripts to leverage external components for tasks beyond its native capabilities, such as file system access or database connectivity. Unlike compiled languages, VBScript employs late binding exclusively, where object types and members are resolved at runtime rather than compile time, eliminating the need for type libraries or early binding references. This approach simplifies scripting but incurs a performance overhead due to dynamic method invocation.
To instantiate a COM object, VBScript uses the CreateObject function, which takes a ProgID string identifying the object class and optionally a server name for remote instantiation. For example, the following code creates a FileSystemObject for file operations:
Set fso = CreateObject("Scripting.FileSystemObject")
This returns a reference to the new object, which can then be assigned to a Variant variable. If the specified class is not registered on the system, the function raises a runtime error.
Once created, object properties and methods are accessed via dot notation, enabling assignment and invocation without explicit type declarations. Properties can be read or set directly, such as folderPath = fso.GetSpecialFolder(2).Path, while methods accept arguments as needed, like file = fso.CreateTextFile("example.txt", True). All interactions occur through the Variant data type, supporting VBScript's dynamic nature. Errors during access populate the intrinsic Err object, which provides details like Err.Number and Err.Description for handling via On Error statements.
COM collections, which group related objects like files in a directory, are iterated using the For Each...Next loop construct. This statement traverses each item in the collection without needing indices, as shown below for processing files:
Set folder = fso.GetFolder("C:\Example")
For Each file In folder.Files
 WScript.Echo file.Name
Next
This promotes readable code for handling dynamic sets returned by COM methods.
To release a COM object and decrement its reference count, facilitating garbage collection and resource cleanup, assign Nothing to the variable holding the reference: Set fso = Nothing. Although VBScript's runtime manages memory automatically, explicit release is recommended for long-running scripts or when dealing with resource-intensive objects to prevent leaks. Failure to do so may delay finalization until the script ends.
VBScript provides a few built-in objects for core operations, including the global Err object for error management, as noted earlier. In the Windows Script Host (WSH) runtime, the WScript object exposes environment-specific properties and methods, such as WScript.Arguments for command-line input. Additionally, intrinsic functions like MsgBox for displaying modal dialogs and InputBox for user prompts serve as simple interaction tools, though they are not full objects and availability depends on the host environment.
A key limitation of VBScript's object model is its lack of native inheritance and advanced object-oriented paradigms, requiring reliance on external COM components for complex hierarchies or behaviors. While version 5.0 introduced the Class statement for defining custom classes with properties and methodse.g., Class SimpleClass: Private m_Value: Public Property Get Value: Value = m_Value: End Property: Public Property Let Value(v): m_Value = v: End Property: End Classthese are basic implementations without polymorphism or inheritance, restricting VBScript to procedural extensions via COM rather than full OOP.

Runtime Environments

Client-Side Web Scripting

VBScript was primarily utilized for client-side scripting within Microsoft Internet Explorer, enabling dynamic interactions on web pages without server involvement. Developers embedded VBScript code directly into HTML documents to manipulate page elements, respond to user actions, and integrate with browser-specific features. This approach allowed for enhanced interactivity in web applications during the late 1990s and early 2000s, particularly in enterprise environments reliant on Windows technologies.
To incorporate VBScript into an HTML page, the <SCRIPT> tag was used with the LANGUAGE="VBScript" attribute, enclosing the script code between opening and closing tags. For instance, a basic script to display an alert might appear as follows:
<SCRIPT LANGUAGE="VBScript">
 MsgBox "Hello from VBScript!"
</SCRIPT>
This embedding method executed the code on the client side when the page loaded, provided the browser supported VBScript.
Event handling in VBScript relied on HTML attributes such as onclick, onload, or onchange to trigger scripts in response to user interactions or page events. For example, an HTML button could invoke a VBScript function via onclick="vbscript:MyFunction()", where MyFunction might validate input or update page content. These events integrated seamlessly with the browser's event model, allowing scripts to respond to form submissions, mouse clicks, or document loading without external dependencies.
Access to the Document Object Model (DOM) was facilitated through the document object, unique to Internet Explorer's implementation, enabling VBScript to read, modify, and interact with HTML elements. Scripts could perform tasks like form validation by checking document.forms("myForm").elements("username").value or dynamically updating content with document.all("divID").innerHTML = "New text". This IE-specific DOM access supported practical applications such as real-time data validation and content manipulation, though it lacked cross-browser compatibility. For example, a validation script might verify email format before submission:
Sub ValidateEmail()
 Dim emailField
 Set emailField = document.getElementById("email")
 If Not InStr(emailField.value, "@") > 0 Then
 MsgBox "Invalid (/page/Email_address)"
 End If
End Sub
Such operations highlighted VBScript's role in creating responsive web interfaces.
Historically, VBScript enhanced Internet Explorer's capabilities by providing a scripting language tailored for ActiveX controls, serving as an alternative to Java applets for embedding rich, Windows-native functionality into web pages. Introduced in 1996 alongside ActiveX, it allowed developers to script interactions with COM objects, facilitating multimedia, database connectivity, and custom UI elements directly in the browser. This integration positioned VBScript as a key component in Microsoft's strategy to extend desktop application features to the web, particularly for intranet and enterprise sites.
As of 2025, VBScript client-side support is limited to legacy environments: it remains functional only in Internet Explorer 11 (on supported Windows versions) or Microsoft Edge's IE compatibility mode when explicitly enabled via policy settings. Microsoft disabled VBScript by default in Internet Explorer 11 for Internet and Untrusted zones starting in August 2019, citing security vulnerabilities and the rise of modern standards like JavaScript. It is not supported in Chromium-based Edge or other contemporary browsers, rendering it obsolete for new web development.

Server-Side Scripting

VBScript serves as a primary scripting language for server-side processing in classic Active Server Pages (ASP), where it enables dynamic web content generation on Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS). In ASP applications, VBScript code is embedded directly into .asp files using delimiter tags such as <% %> for executable scripts and <%= %> for outputting expressions, allowing seamless integration of server-side logic with HTML markup. When an .asp file is requested, IIS parses the server-side VBScript within these tags, executes it on the server, and merges the results into the HTML response sent to the client browser, facilitating tasks like data retrieval and page customization without client-side dependencies.
Classic ASP provides several built-in server objects accessible in VBScript to handle HTTP interactions and state management. The Request object captures incoming client data, including form submissions via the Form collection, query strings, cookies, and server variables. The Response object controls output to the client, supporting methods like Write for dynamic content insertion, Redirect for navigation, and AddHeader for custom HTTP headers. For state persistence, the Session object maintains user-specific variables across requests using key-value storage and the Abandon method to end sessions, while the Application object shares global data across all users with locking mechanisms like Lock and Unlock to prevent concurrent access issues. Additionally, the Server object offers utility functions, such as CreateObject for instantiating COM components, MapPath for virtual-to-physical path translation, and HTMLEncode or URLEncode for secure string handling.
Database connectivity in VBScript-based ASP applications relies on ActiveX Data Objects (ADO), a COM-based library for interacting with OLE DB-compliant data sources like SQL Server or Access databases. Developers typically create an ADODB.Connection object using Server.CreateObject("ADODB.Connection") to establish a connection string, such as for SQL operations, followed by opening it with methods like Open specifying the provider and credentials. The ADODB.Recordset object is then instantiated similarly and populated via Open with an SQL query and the connection reference, enabling forward-only or dynamic cursors for reading, updating, or inserting records for example, executing SELECT statements to retrieve data and binding results to ASP pages. Constants for cursor types and errors are often included via <!--#include file="adovbs.inc" %> for cleaner code.
VBScript's server-side capabilities peaked as the core of classic ASP during its introduction in 1996 with IIS 3.0 and through the 2000s, powering dynamic websites for enterprises before the shift to ASP.NET. The final major update, ASP 3.0, arrived in November 2000 alongside IIS 5.0, introducing enhancements like improved error handling but no further VBScript-specific advancements since. As of November 2025, VBScript in classic ASP remains executable on modern IIS versions (7.0 and later) for legacy maintenance, provided VBScript is installed as a Feature on Demand (FOD) in Windows 11 version 24H2 and later, though Microsoft discourages its use for new development due to security vulnerabilities and lack of ongoing support.

Windows Script Host

The Windows Script Host (WSH) is a standalone runtime environment provided by Microsoft for executing VBScript and JScript files outside of web browsers or server contexts, primarily designed to facilitate system administration and automation tasks on Windows operating systems. Introduced in 1998 alongside Windows 98 and Windows 2000, WSH enables users to run scripts locally for tasks such as file management, network operations, and command execution, making it a key tool for IT administrators before the rise of more modern scripting languages like PowerShell.
WSH consists of two primary executable components: wscript.exe, which provides a graphical user interface (GUI) for interactive script execution and supports popup dialogs for user input and output, and cscript.exe, a console-based host that directs output to standard output (stdout) for batch processing and non-interactive environments. VBScript files typically use the .vbs file extension and can be executed by double-clicking them in Windows Explorer, which defaults to wscript.exe, or via the command line using either host (e.g., cscript.exe script.vbs), allowing for flexible invocation in automated workflows. Scripts can accept command-line arguments, accessible through the WScript.Arguments collection of the built-in WScript object, enabling dynamic parameterization for tasks like processing user-supplied paths or options.
Key built-in objects in WSH enhance VBScript's capabilities for system interaction. The WScript object supplies application-level information, such as the script's full path (WScript.ScriptFullName) and the aforementioned arguments, while also providing methods to quit the script or interact with the host environment. WScript.Shell allows running external commands (via Run or Exec methods), accessing environment variables (Environment collection), and manipulating the Windows shell, such as creating shortcuts or navigating special folders. Additionally, WScript.Network supports network administration functions, including mapping and unmapping drives (MapNetworkDrive and RemoveNetworkDrive), connecting to shared resources, and retrieving user or computer names. For file system operations, scripts can instantiate the FileSystemObject via COM using CreateObject("Scripting.FileSystemObject") to handle reading, writing, and managing files and folders.
Regarding security, WSH scripts execute with the privileges of the invoking user, lacking a built-in sandbox, which allows access to local resources but exposes systems to risks if malicious scripts are run. Later versions, such as WSH 5.6, introduced features like script code signing and runtime limits (e.g., via the /t parameter in cscript.exe to cap execution time at up to 32,767 seconds) to mitigate unauthorized or runaway executions, though administrators are advised to run scripts under least-privilege accounts. As of November 2025, WSH for VBScript requires VBScript to be installed as a Feature on Demand (FOD) in Windows 11 version 24H2 and later, with FOD enabled by default until approximately 2027.

Specialized Hosting (HTA and WSC)

HTML Applications (HTAs) provide a specialized hosting environment for VBScript by allowing developers to create standalone, full-trust applications using HTML, Dynamic HTML, and embedded scripts with a .hta file extension. Unlike standard web pages, HTAs are executed by the Microsoft HTML Application Host (mshta.exe), which grants them unrestricted access to the local filesystem, registry, and system resources, bypassing typical browser security restrictions. The <HTA:APPLICATION> element, placed within the <head> section of the HTA file, enables customization of the application window, including attributes for borders, captions, minimize/maximize buttons, scrollbars, and taskbar visibility. VBScript can be embedded using <SCRIPT LANGUAGE="VBScript"> tags to handle events, manipulate objects, and perform tasks such as file operations or COM interactions.
HTAs are particularly suited for developing desktop-like applications, such as custom administrative tools or configuration utilities, where a graphical interface is needed alongside scripting capabilities. For instance, an HTA might use VBScript to read user input from HTML forms and then access local files without prompting for permissions, offering advantages like seamless integration of UI elements with system-level operations. This format allows for rapid prototyping of Windows-specific tools but requires caution due to its elevated privileges, which can expose systems to risks if HTAs are sourced from untrusted locations. As of November 2025, HTAs require VBScript to be installed as a Feature on Demand (FOD) in Windows 11 version 24H2 and later, with FOD enabled by default until approximately 2027.
Windows Script Components (WSCs) offer another niche hosting option for VBScript, enabling the creation of reusable COM objects stored in .wsc files with an XML-based structure. The file begins with a <component> root element that defines the overall component, while nested <public> elements expose methods, properties, and events to external callers, such as other scripts or applications. VBScript code is contained within <script language="VBScript"> sections, often wrapped in CDATA to ensure XML compatibility, allowing functions and procedures to implement the public interface. WSCs are registered as COM components via scrobj.dll, making them callable from environments like Windows Script Host or ASP pages.
WSCs facilitate modular code deployment in larger systems, such as encapsulating utility functions for database access or business logic that can be reused across multiple VBScript projects. Their advantages include easy maintenance through text-based editing and broad compatibility with COM-enabled hosts, promoting code reuse without the need for compiled languages. However, both HTAs and WSCs are inherently Windows-specific technologies, tied to legacy scripting infrastructure, and their use has diminished with the evolution of modern development platforms. As of November 2025, WSCs require VBScript to be installed as a Feature on Demand (FOD) in Windows 11 version 24H2 and later, with FOD enabled by default until approximately 2027.

Development Tools

Editors and IDEs

VBScript code can be authored using basic text editors such as Notepad, which supports saving files in .vbs or .asp formats without any specialized features. Other plain text editors like EditPad Pro provide enhanced capabilities, including syntax highlighting for VBScript to improve readability during editing.
For more specialized development, VbsEdit serves as a dedicated VBScript editor offering syntax coloring, IntelliSense for code completion, and support for projects that organize multiple scripts. It includes features like code snippets and validation to check script syntax before execution, making it suitable for managing complex VBScript files.
Advanced environments include PrimalScript, a universal scripting IDE from SAPIEN Technologies that supports VBScript alongside other languages, providing multi-file project management, auto-completion for COM objects, and integrated tools for script organization. Visual Studio offers limited VBScript support through its text editor and extensions, primarily for embedding scripts in ASP pages or basic editing, though it lacks native IntelliSense tailored to VBScript's COM interactions. Microsoft never provided an official IDE for VBScript, leading to reliance on community and third-party tools.
Modern options like Visual Studio Code can be extended for VBScript via plugins such as the VBS extension, which enables syntax highlighting, auto-indentation, and basic snippets for common constructs like object manipulation. These extensions emphasize color-coding and partial auto-complete for VBScript keywords and COM methods, though full validation requires external tools. Developers often seek these editors for their integration with Windows Script Host environments to streamline script authoring.

Debugging and Testing

VBScript provides limited built-in mechanisms for debugging and testing, primarily through runtime error handling and basic output methods, as it lacks a native integrated debugger or formal unit testing framework. Developers rely on the Err object to capture and inspect errors, which includes properties like Number for error codes, Description for textual details, and methods such as Clear to reset the object after handling. This object is automatically populated when an error occurs, allowing scripts to query it programmatically to diagnose issues during execution.
Error handling in VBScript is managed via the On Error Resume Next statement, which suppresses runtime errors and continues execution, requiring subsequent checks on the Err object to detect and respond to issues. For instance, after a potentially failing operation, code can examine Err.Number to determine if an error occurred (non-zero indicates an error), then log or correct based on Err.Description. This approach is essential for robust scripts but demands manual intervention, as unhandled errors otherwise halt execution with a dialog in environments like Windows Script Host (WSH).
In browser environments, particularly legacy Internet Explorer, debugging client-side VBScript was supported through the Internet Explorer Developer Tools, which allowed setting breakpoints, stepping through code, and inspecting variables in scripts embedded in HTML pages. These tools, accessible via F12 or scripting menus in older IE versions, provided a visual interface for tracing execution flow, though support diminished with modern browsers favoring JavaScript. For WSH-based scripts, output for debugging often uses MsgBox for interactive pop-ups or WScript.Echo for console-like messages, with third-party tools like VbsEdit offering advanced features such as breakpoints, variable watches, and step-by-step execution in a dedicated IDE.
Logging errors to files enhances testing by persisting diagnostic information, achieved using the FileSystemObject from the Scripting runtime library to write Err details or custom traces to text files. This method allows reviewing script behavior post-execution, especially in automated or server-side contexts where interactive output is unavailable. For testing, VBScript supports informal unit tests through self-contained functions that invoke code under scrutiny and verify results via conditional checks, with manual assertions using If statements and output logging; no standardized framework exists, so verification remains ad hoc and developer-driven.
Common errors in VBScript include type mismatches, where incompatible data types cause runtime failures (e.g., assigning a string to a numeric variable), and object not found exceptions from invalid references. These are mitigated by functions like IsObject to validate object existence before use and IsEmpty to check uninitialized variants, integrated into error-handling routines to prevent cascading failures.

Common Applications

Web Development

VBScript played a significant role in early web development, particularly within Microsoft's ecosystem, enabling both client-side and server-side scripting to create dynamic web applications. Introduced in 1996 as part of Windows Script Technologies, it allowed developers to embed scripts directly into HTML pages for enhanced interactivity and server processing. Client-side VBScript executed in Internet Explorer, manipulating the Document Object Model (DOM) to respond to user events, while server-side usage in Active Server Pages (ASP) generated dynamic content before being sent to the browser. This dual capability made VBScript a staple for building responsive web interfaces during the late 1990s and early 2000s.
On the client side, VBScript was primarily supported in Internet Explorer, where it facilitated form validation and event-driven user interfaces. Developers used it to check user inputs in real-time, such as verifying email formats or required fields before form submission, preventing invalid data from reaching the server. For instance, a script could validate a text input by comparing its value against predefined criteria and displaying alerts if errors occurred. Event handling enabled dynamic UI elements, like updating table rows based on user selections; an example involves adding or removing rows in a table via button clicks, leveraging VBScript's access to the browser's object model to modify HTML elements on the fly. However, its IE exclusivity limited cross-browser compatibility compared to JavaScript.
Server-side scripting with VBScript in ASP allowed for dynamic page generation, commonly used in e-commerce sites and content management systems prior to the .NET era. In ASP files, VBScript code delimited by <% %> tags processed requests, interacted with databases, and output HTML. For example, it powered simple CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) applications by querying data and rendering results into web pages, such as displaying product catalogs from a backend store. This approach was efficient for intranet sites, where server resources handled logic like user authentication or content personalization.
VBScript integrated seamlessly with ActiveX controls for embedding plugins, such as multimedia players or custom UI components, directly in web pages via IE. For database connectivity, it paired with ActiveX Data Objects (ADO), a COM-based library that enabled server-side scripts to execute SQL queries and bind results to web forms; a brief reference to COM underpins this integration for reliable data handling. Peak usage occurred in the 1990s and 2000s, particularly for corporate intranets and early online stores, where VBScript's simplicity accelerated development of interactive applications without requiring compiled code.
VBScript's prominence in web development waned as JavaScript frameworks like jQuery and modern browsers prioritized cross-platform support, rendering VBScript's IE dependency obsolete. On the server side, ASP.NET's introduction in 2002 offered a more robust, object-oriented alternative, shifting developers toward compiled languages and reducing reliance on interpreted VBScript. By the 2010s, usage had significantly declined in favor of these technologies, though legacy ASP sites persisted in enterprise environments.

System Automation

VBScript enables system automation on Windows platforms primarily through the Windows Script Host (WSH), a lightweight environment that hosts VBScript files (.vbs) to perform administrative tasks without requiring a full development IDE. WSH provides core objects like WshShell and WshNetwork, allowing scripts to interact with the operating system for routine maintenance and configuration. This integration makes VBScript suitable for IT administrators seeking quick, script-based solutions for local system management.
File operations in WSH scripts are handled via the FileSystemObject from the Scripting Runtime library, which supports actions such as copying, deleting, and creating files and folders. For instance, the CopyFile method can replicate files to a backup directory, forming the basis of simple backup routines that ensure data redundancy during maintenance. Similarly, the DeleteFile method allows selective removal of temporary files, aiding in disk cleanup tasks. Registry modifications are facilitated by the WshShell object's RegWrite method, which writes keys and values to the Windows registrysuch as updating environment variables or application settingsfor centralized configuration changes.
Network-related automation includes drive mapping and printer connections using the WshNetwork object. The MapNetworkDrive method assigns a local drive letter to a remote UNC path, often employed in user logon scripts to automatically provide access to shared resources upon authentication. For printer setup, the AddPrinterConnection method links a local printer port to a network printer, streamlining deployment in workgroup environments. Application control is achieved through WshShell methods like Run, which launches executables (e.g., opening a command prompt with WshShell.Run "cmd.exe"), and SendKeys, which simulates keyboard input to interact with GUI applications, such as automating form submissions in legacy software. Inventory checks, such as querying installed software or hardware, can integrate briefly with COM objects like Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) for deeper system queries.
These capabilities offer advantages for administrators, including simplicity in scripting without compilation and seamless integration with WMI for querying system states, reducing the need for complex tools in routine tasks. Example scripts for backup routines might use FileSystemObject to iterate through directories and copy files to a safe location, while printer setup scripts employ WshNetwork to connect devices based on user group membership. Inventory scripts, combining WshShell for output and WMI for data retrieval, provide snapshots of system resources like CPU usage or disk space.

Legacy and Enterprise Uses

VBScript remains integral to custom actions within Windows Installer (MSI) packages, enabling installers to perform dynamic operations such as file manipulations, registry modifications, and user interactions during software deployment. These actions leverage VBScript's integration with the Windows Installer API, allowing scripts to access session properties and execute in both immediate and deferred contexts for elevated privileges. For instance, Type 38 custom actions embed VBScript directly into the MSI database, facilitating complex installation logic without requiring external executables.
In legacy applications, VBScript is often embedded for configuration management and reporting tasks, particularly in enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems developed in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Software like SYSPRO utilizes VBScript to add custom logic to forms, listviews, and toolbars, enabling tailored data processing and user interface behaviors stored on servers and cached on clients. Similarly, tools such as Enterprise Architect employ VBScript for model inspection, query execution, and automation of diagram generation and reporting workflows. These integrations persist due to VBScript's lightweight syntax and native COM interoperability, which simplify extending older applications without full rewrites.
Within enterprise environments, VBScript supports Group Policy logon scripts to automate user sessions in Windows domains, such as mapping network drives, setting environment variables, and configuring printers upon authentication. Administrators deploy these scripts via the Group Policy Management Console under User Configuration > Policies > Windows Settings > Scripts (Logon/Logoff), where VBScript files execute seamlessly with Active Directory integration. Additionally, VBScript powers monitoring tools in Windows domains, including custom checks for network performance, server health, and resource utilization; for example, ActiveXperts Network Monitor allows VBScript-based scripts to query WMI and generate alerts based on predefined thresholds.
Maintaining VBScript in production environments presents challenges due to its deep ties to COM components, which complicate migration efforts in large-scale deployments. Scripts often rely on COM objects for interacting with Windows APIs, legacy applications, and third-party libraries, making replacement with modern alternatives like PowerShell require extensive refactoring to preserve functionality. Enterprises must audit for these dependencies across Group Policy Objects, scheduled tasks, and embedded code to avoid disruptions, as VBScript's removal could break automated workflows integral to domain operations.
In niche areas like test automation, VBScript serves as the primary scripting language for tools such as HP Unified Functional Testing (UFT, formerly QuickTest Professional or QTP), where it drives functional and regression testing by interacting with application objects via descriptive programming and checkpoints. UFT's Expert View uses VBScript syntax to record and playback tests, manipulate data tables, and integrate with COM-based APIs for cross-application validation, maintaining its role in enterprise quality assurance pipelines despite newer alternatives.

Deprecation and Legacy

Security Vulnerabilities

VBScript has long served as a vector for malware distribution due to its ease of use in crafting executable scripts that can be disguised as benign files. A prominent example is the ILOVEYOU worm, also known as VBS/LoveLetter, a mass-mailing virus written in VBScript that spread via email attachments in 2000, infecting over 50 million computers worldwide and causing an estimated $10 billion in damages by overwriting files and stealing passwords. The language's simplicity facilitates obfuscation techniques, such as string encoding and redundant code insertion, allowing attackers to evade antivirus detection while delivering payloads like trojans or credential stealers, as seen in recent campaigns distributing malware such as Zloader and Qakbot.
Unlike modern scripting environments, VBScript lacks built-in sandboxing, executing with full user privileges when run via the Windows Script Host (WSH) or HTML Applications (HTA). This design enables scripts to access local files, registry keys, and system processes without restrictions, posing risks of unauthorized data exfiltration or modification. In HTA files, executed by mshta.exe, VBScript operates outside the browser's security boundaries, bypassing Internet Explorer's zone-based protections and potentially enabling privilege escalation through elevated command execution. Historical buffer overflow vulnerabilities in the VBScript engine, such as CVE-2010-0917, further amplified these risks by allowing remote code execution when processing malformed inputs in Internet Explorer.
In browser contexts, VBScript's integration with Internet Explorer facilitated cross-site scripting (XSS)-like attacks through script injection, where malicious VBS code could be embedded in web pages to execute in the user's session. These flaws, exemplified by remote code execution vulnerabilities like CVE-2014-6363, contributed to Internet Explorer's declining market share as users shifted to more secure browsers. VBScript was ultimately disabled by default in Internet Explorer 11 on Windows 7 and 8.1 in 2019 and omitted from Microsoft Edge entirely for security reasons, reflecting broader efforts to mitigate its exploitability.
To mitigate these inherent weaknesses stemming from VBScript's age and lack of modern safeguards like just-in-time compilation or memory isolation, organizations should avoid running scripts from untrusted sources and disable WSH via registry settings (e.g., setting HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software(/page/Microsoft)\Windows Script Host\Settings\Enabled to 0) when not required. Implementing least-privilege execution, such as running scripts in restricted user accounts, and employing endpoint detection tools to monitor for obfuscated VBS activity are recommended, though complete removal remains the most effective defense against ongoing phishing campaigns targeting legacy systems. Despite deprecation, VBScript's persistence in phishing attacks underscores its lasting impact on cybersecurity threats.

Deprecation Timeline

In October 2023, Microsoft officially announced the deprecation of VBScript, adding it to the list of deprecated features in the Windows operating system.
The deprecation process is structured in three phases to allow for gradual transition. Phase 1, spanning 2024 through 2026, began with the release of Windows 11 version 24H2 in October 2024, where VBScript is provided as a Feature on Demand (FOD) that is pre-installed and enabled by default but can be optionally removed by users. In Phase 2, from 2026 to 2027, VBScript will remain available as an FOD in future Windows releases but will be disabled by default, requiring manual enabling through system settings. Phase 3, commencing after 2027, will involve the complete removal of VBScript from Windows, including the deletion of core files such as vbscript.dll.
As of November 2025, VBScript continues to be available and enabled by default as an FOD in Windows 11 versions 24H2 and 25H2. Microsoft has issued guidance warning of potential overlaps between VBScript and VBA, particularly affecting shared components like regular expression libraries in VBA projects.
In terms of browser support, VBScript has never been natively supported in Microsoft Edge, which explicitly excluded it upon its 2015 launch in favor of modern web standards. Additionally, Internet Explorer, the last major browser to support VBScript, was fully retired on June 15, 2022. The deprecation timeline for VBScript in Windows is primarily driven by longstanding security vulnerabilities that have made it a target for exploitation.

Migration Strategies

Migrating from VBScript requires a systematic approach to identify dependencies and transition to contemporary scripting languages that offer enhanced security, performance, and maintainability. The first step involves assessing current usage to understand the scope of impact. Organizations can inventory VBScript scripts by scanning file systems for .vbs extensions using PowerShell commands like Get-ChildItem -Path C:\ -Filter "*.vbs" -Recurse, reviewing registry keys associated with WScript or CScript executables via Get-ItemProperty in PowerShell, or employing monitoring tools such as Sysmon to log process creations involving vbscript.dll. These methods help detect both explicit scripts and embedded dependencies in applications or scheduled tasks.
Suitable alternatives depend on the original use case, with Microsoft recommending PowerShell for Windows automation due to its object-oriented pipeline processing, built-in cmdlets for system administration, and improved security features like execution policy controls. For web development, JavaScript serves as a direct replacement, leveraging Node.js for server-side scripting in place of Active Server Pages (ASP) or browser-embedded VBScript, while enabling integration with modern frameworks like React or Vue.js. Python emerges as a versatile, cross-platform option for general scripting and automation, supporting libraries such as os and subprocess for file and process management akin to VBScript's capabilities, and offering broad ecosystem compatibility beyond Windows environments.
Conversion from VBScript to these alternatives involves mapping common constructs to equivalent features. For instance, the FileSystemObject used in VBScript for file operations translates to PowerShell's Get-ChildItem cmdlet for directory enumeration or Get-Content for reading files, as shown in guides that detail syntax shifts like replacing CreateObject("Scripting.FileSystemObject") with New-Object -TypeName System.IO.DirectoryInfo.) Automated tools, such as AI-powered online converters, can accelerate this by translating VBScript code blocks to PowerShell or Python, though manual review is essential for context-specific logic. In web contexts, migrating ASP pages with VBScript involves rewriting server-side logic in ASP.NET using C# or VB.NET equivalents for objects like Request and Response, or porting to Node.js with Express.js for handling HTTP requests and responses.
Challenges in migration often stem from VBScript's heavy reliance on Component Object Model (COM) interfaces for interacting with Windows components, such as Excel automation via CreateObject("Excel.Application"). In PowerShell, these can be preserved using New-Object -ComObject to instantiate COM objects, but this requires careful handling of type mismatches and error propagation, potentially necessitating wrapper functions or .NET alternatives where available. JavaScript and Python face similar hurdles with COM, often requiring bridges like ActiveX in browsers (now deprecated) or pywin32 for Python, which may limit cross-platform portability.
Best practices emphasize an incremental rewrite strategy, prioritizing high-risk or frequently used scripts first, followed by parallel testing to ensure functional equivalence. Testing in isolated virtual machines (VMs) allows simulation of VBScript-disabled environments without disrupting production systems. Microsoft advises adopting PowerShell 7 or later for its cross-platform support, enhanced performance, and compatibility with legacy COM interactions during the transition. This phased approach aligns with the ongoing deprecation timeline, minimizing downtime as VBScript support diminishes in future Windows releases.

References

VBScript deprecation: Timelines and next steps | Windows IT Pro Blog

Programming Languages | Microsoft Learn

Translating to VBScript - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Using COM Objects in Windows Script Host - Win32 apps

ASP Overview

Using VBScript - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

VBScript ADO Programming | Microsoft Learn

Syntax Differences - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

Windows Script Host: New Code-Signing Features Protect Against ...

1. Introduction - VBScript in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition - O'Reilly

Microsoft Announces ActiveX Scripting - Source

Day 21 -- Security, Stability, and Distributed Source Control Issues

VBScript Version Information - VbsEdit

Computing - Articles - VBScript Version 2.0 - Lloyd Borrett

VBScript >> Introduction - DevGuru

MS10-022: Description of the security update for Visual Basic ...

7. Windows Script Host - VBScript in a Nutshell - O'Reilly

Using Object-Oriented Programming with VBScript - Sign In - O'Reilly

Microsoft says VBScript will be retired in future Windows - The Register

Rem Statement - Office VBScript Documentation

Visual Basic naming rules (VBA) - Microsoft Learn

https://documentation.help/MS-Office-VBScript/vsstmDim.htm

How to: Break and Combine Statements in Code - Visual Basic

Option Explicit Statement - Office VBScript Documentation

2. Program Structure - VBScript in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition 

On Error Statement - Office VBScript Documentation

Variants Supported in VBScript | Microsoft Learn

VarType function (Visual Basic for Applications) - Microsoft Learn

 VBScript Reference Manual - ICP DAS

If...Then...Else statement (VBA) - Microsoft Learn

Select Case statement (VBA) | Microsoft Learn

For...Next statement (VBA) | Microsoft Learn

Sub statement (VBA) | Microsoft Learn

Early and Late Binding - Visual Basic | Microsoft Learn

CreateObject function (Visual Basic for Applications) | Microsoft Learn

Err object - Microsoft Learn

Nothing keyword - Visual Basic - Microsoft Learn

Creating Classes with VBScript 5.0 - ITPro Today

Writing Procedures | Microsoft Learn

Document property (Internet Explorer) - Microsoft Learn

A break from the past, part 2: Saying goodbye to ActiveX, VBScript ...

An update on disabling VBScript in Internet Explorer 11

Creating Simple ASP Pages

ASP Built-in Objects

Classic ASP Applications on IIS 7.0 and IIS 7.5 Overview

Classic ASP: Gone Forever or Still Useful? - GeoPlugin - Resources

classic asp will also be abandoned? - Microsoft Q&A

wscript | Microsoft Learn

Create a desktop shortcut with Windows Script Host - Microsoft Learn

Windows Script Host 5.6 Boasts Windows XP Integration, Security ...

HTA:APPLICATION Object

 Windows Script Components - VBScript

Windows Script Components in IIS

Text Editor for Programmers to Edit VBScript Source Code

VbsEdit - VBScript Editor with Debugger

VbsEdit - Download

PrimalScript | Scripting and Debugging for PowerShell, VBScript ...

Support Statement for Visual Basic 6.0 on Windows - Microsoft Learn

VBS - Visual Studio Marketplace

A vscode extension for VBScript language support - GitHub

VBScript deprecation: Timelines and next steps - Developer Support

Cutting Edge: A Client-side Environment for ASP Pages

VBScript and Forms

Validating Data On Web Forms - CODE Magazine

ASP Overview | Microsoft Learn

Creating Simple ASP Pages | Microsoft Learn

Accessing Data with ADO | Microsoft Learn

Dino Esposito on Comparing Web Forms with ASP.NET MVC

Classic ASP support clarification - Microsoft Q&A

FileSystemObject object - Microsoft Learn

Scriptable Shell Objects (Windows)

 Windows Script Host Getting Started - VBScript

Using WMI - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

Windows Management Instrumentation: A Simple, Powerful Tool for ...

Custom Action Type 38 - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

What are the Pros and Cons of using VBScript in MSI packaging?

VBScripting in SYSPRO

Scripting | Enterprise Architect User Guide - Sparx Systems

Using Startup, Shutdown, Logon, and Logoff Scripts in Group Policy

Custom VBScript Check Guidelines | ActiveXperts Network Monitor

VBScript deprecation: Detection strategies for Windows

VBScript for Automation (QTP/UFT) Testing - Software Testing Material

QTP - Introduction - Tutorials Point

Virus:VBS/LoveLetter threat description - Microsoft

Email-Worm:VBS/LoveLetter | F-Secure

Obfuscated VBScript Drops Zloader, Ursnif, Qakbot, Dridex

Simple but Efficient VBScript Obfuscation - SANS ISC

From Email to RAT: Deciphering a VB Script-Driven Campaign

Command and Scripting Interpreter: Visual Basic - MITRE ATT&CK

VBScript Scripting Techniques: HTAs

Elevate HTA file and all console commands that are run from it

CVE-2010-0917 - NVD

Microsoft Security Bulletin MS14-080 - Critical

Edge's IE Mode and VBScript - Microsoft Community

Microsoft to kill off VBScript in Windows to block malware delivery

VBScript Is Retiring: From Scripting to Security Threats - SOCRadar

Microsoft disables VBScript by default - gHacks Tech News

Deprecated features in the Windows client - Microsoft Learn

Prepare your VBA projects for VBScript deprecation in Windows

Internet Explorer 11 - Microsoft Lifecycle

Convert VBScript to Python using AI - CodePorting AI Products

Online VBScript to PowerShell Converter - CodeConvert AI

Migrating from Classic ASP to ASP.NET - equivalent objects and ...

From ASP.Net to Node.js - Stone Steps Blogs

Translating VBScript to PowerShell - IDERA

ComObject in Powershell and CreateObject() in VB? - Stack Overflow

Migrating from Windows PowerShell 5.1 to PowerShell 7
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion