Web Components Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Web Components
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Web Components is a suite of web platform technologies that enable developers to create reusable, encapsulated custom HTML elements for use in web pages and applications, consisting primarily of Custom Elements, Shadow DOM, and HTML Templates. These standards allow for the definition of new HTML tags with their own JavaScript behavior, isolated DOM structures, and templated markup, promoting modularity without reliance on external frameworks. Introduced as part of efforts to enhance the web's extensibility, Web Components have evolved from early proposals in the early 2010s, with key specifications reaching stable implementation in major browsers by the late 2010s.
The core of Web Components lies in Custom Elements, which provide JavaScript APIs for defining new HTML elements or extending built-in ones, such as through the customElements.define() method that registers a class extending HTMLElement. This allows elements to have lifecycle callbacks like connectedCallback for initialization when inserted into the DOM, enabling dynamic behavior while integrating seamlessly with existing HTML parsing and scripting. Early versions, known as Custom Elements v0 using document.registerElement(), were deprecated in favor of v1 for better interoperability, with v1 support landing in Chrome 54, Firefox 63, and Safari 10.1 by 2018.
Complementing this is Shadow DOM, which creates an encapsulated DOM subtree attached to an element, shielding its internal structure, styles, and scripts from the main document to prevent conflicts. Accessed via methods like Element.attachShadow(), it supports modes such as "open" for external access or "closed" for stricter isolation, and facilitates content projection through slots for composing components. This encapsulation ensures that component styles do not leak globally, a key advantage for building complex UIs.
HTML Templates, via the <template> element, allow authors to define inert markup fragments that can be cloned and activated at runtime, often populating Shadow DOMs within custom elements. The element's content is stored as a DocumentFragment, making it ideal for reusable snippets without immediate rendering, and it integrates with <slot> for flexible content insertion. All these technologies are defined in living standards maintained by the WHATWG, ensuring ongoing evolution and broad browser compatibility without proprietary extensions.

Introduction

Definition and Purpose

Web Components are a suite of web platform APIs that enable developers to create reusable, encapsulated custom HTML elements, allowing for the construction of modular user interface components without reliance on third-party frameworks. This technology stack includes Custom Elements for defining new HTML tags, Shadow DOM for isolating internal structure and styles, and HTML Templates for declaring reusable markup fragments.
The primary purpose of Web Components is to facilitate the development of self-contained UI elements that operate consistently across modern web browsers and can integrate seamlessly with any JavaScript library or framework that supports standard HTML. By providing a native mechanism for component creation, Web Components promote interoperability, enabling developers to build and share components that function independently of specific ecosystems, thus reducing dependency on proprietary tools and enhancing long-term maintainability in web applications.
At their core, Web Components embody principles of reusability, encapsulation, and composability. Reusability allows a single component to be instantiated multiple times across different projects or pages without duplication of code. Encapsulation ensures that a component's internal styles, behaviors, and markup remain isolated from the rest of the document, preventing unintended interactions or global pollution. Composability supports the nesting and combination of components to form complex interfaces, much like standard HTML elements.
The high-level architecture of Web Components integrates DOM manipulation, CSS scoping, and templating to create autonomous units. Custom Elements extend the DOM with user-defined tags, Shadow DOM provides a scoped subtree for private content and styles that do not leak to or from the main document, and HTML Templates offer inert markup that can be cloned and activated as needed. Together, these elements form a cohesive system where components can manage their own rendering, events, and state while remaining composable within larger applications.

Goals and Advantages

The primary goals of Web Components are to promote native reusability across HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, allowing developers to create self-contained custom elements that can be shared and integrated seamlessly into any web application. By standardizing component creation on the web platform, they aim to reduce reliance on third-party frameworks, fostering a more modular and interoperable development environment where components behave consistently across browsers and projects. This approach enhances the web's extensibility, enabling authors to extend HTML without proprietary tools or languages.
Key advantages include framework-agnostic interoperability, which permits components to integrate with any JavaScript library or framework, such as React, Angular, or Vue, without requiring code rewrites or adapters. Encapsulation of styles and behaviorprimarily through Shadow DOMimproves maintainability by isolating internal implementation details, avoiding global CSS conflicts and simplifying theming across applications. Web Components also contribute to reduced bundle sizes in progressive web apps, as they leverage native browser APIs for lower memory usage and faster startup times compared to framework-based alternatives, while eliminating the need for additional runtime libraries.
In practice, Web Components excel in building UI libraries and design systems, exemplified by Google's Material Web Components, which deliver a consistent, accessible set of reusable elements implementing Material Design principles for cross-platform use. They support micro-frontends by allowing independent development and deployment of modular UI pieces from separate teams, and enable embeddable widgets that can be dropped into diverse sites without compatibility issues. Unlike older techniques such as iFrames, which provide isolation but introduce performance overhead and limited integration, or CSS-in-JS methods that often demand build tools for scoped styling, Web Components offer native encapsulation and reusability directly in the browser, streamlining development without external dependencies.

Core Specifications

Custom Elements

Custom Elements is a web standard that enables developers to define new HTML tags or extend existing ones, allowing the creation of reusable components with custom functionality integrated into the DOM. It is part of the WHATWG HTML Living Standard, which has been endorsed by the W3C as a recommendation since 2018, providing a mechanism to inform the HTML parser how to construct and upgrade elements dynamically.
The core API for Custom Elements is the CustomElementRegistry interface, accessible globally via customElements, which manages the registration of custom element constructors. The primary method is define(name, constructor, options), where name is a string specifying the custom element's tag name, constructor is a class extending HTMLElement (or another built-in element for extensions), and options is an optional object that may include an extends property to specify inheritance from an existing HTML element, such as 'button' for a customized built-in element. Additional methods include get(name), which returns the constructor for a given name or undefined if not defined, and whenDefined(name), which returns a Promise that resolves with the constructor once the element is defined.
Custom elements feature lifecycle callbacks that allow developers to respond to changes in an element's DOM integration and attributes. The connectedCallback() method is invoked each time the element is inserted into a document, with no parameters, enabling initialization such as attaching Shadow DOM. Conversely, disconnectedCallback() fires when the element is removed from its document, also without parameters, suitable for cleanup tasks like event listener removal. The adoptedCallback(oldDocument, newDocument) method is called when the element is moved to a new document, receiving the previous and current Document objects as arguments. For attribute changes, attributeChangedCallback(name, oldValue, newValue, namespace, prevNamespace) is triggered if the constructor's observedAttributes static getter returns an array including the changed attribute; it receives the attribute name, its previous and current values (which may be null), and optionally the namespace if applicable, though most custom elements operate in the null namespace. An optional connectedMoveCallback() can be implemented to handle intra-document moves without full disconnection.
For custom elements defined as form-associated (via the formAssociated option in customElements.define()), additional lifecycle callbacks are available: formAssociatedCallback(), invoked during definition; formDisabledCallback(disabled), when the form control's disabled state changes; formResetCallback(), when the form is reset; and formStateRestoreCallback(), for restoring form state.
Custom element names must follow specific validity rules to ensure compatibility with HTML parsing: they are required to be valid custom element names, starting with a lowercase ASCII letter, followed by lowercase letters, digits, or hyphens, and must contain at least one hyphen to distinguish them from built-in elements (e.g., <my-component> is valid, while <MyComponent> or <component> is not). Reserved names like annotation-xml are prohibited. There are two categories: autonomous custom elements, which are entirely new tags extending HTMLElement and used directly (e.g., <flag-icon></flag-icon>), and customized built-in elements, which extend standard HTML elements via the is attribute (e.g., <button is="plastic-button"></button>) to inherit built-in behaviors while adding custom logic.
Upgrading refers to the process where existing elements in the DOM, created before their custom definition is registered, are automatically converted to custom elements once defined, ensuring backward compatibility for dynamic loading scenarios. The whenDefined(name) method facilitates this by returning a Promise that resolves when the definition is complete, allowing developers to wait before manipulating elements (e.g., customElements.whenDefined('my-component').then(() => { /* upgrade logic */ });). During upgrade, lifecycle callbacks fire as if the element were newly inserted, and any observed attributes are checked for changes from their initial state.

Shadow DOM

The Shadow DOM specification enables the creation of a shadow treea separate DOM subtree attached to a host element, such as a custom elementwhich remains encapsulated and isolated from the main document tree, thereby preventing external JavaScript and CSS from interfering with its internal structure. This isolation forms the foundation of component encapsulation in Web Components, allowing developers to build reusable UI elements without style or DOM conflicts from the surrounding page. The shadow tree is rendered as if it were part of the host element's content, but its internals are hidden, promoting modular design where components manage their own subtree independently.
Key APIs for working with Shadow DOM include the Element.attachShadow() method, which attaches a new shadow root to the specified element and returns a ShadowRoot object representing the root of the shadow tree. This method accepts an options object with a required mode property set to either 'open' or 'closed'; the 'open' mode allows JavaScript access to the shadow root via the host's shadowRoot property (which returns the ShadowRoot instance), while 'closed' mode returns null for shadowRoot, restricting access even from the host element. The ShadowRoot interface extends DocumentOrShadowRoot and supports standard DOM methods scoped to the shadow tree, such as getElementById() to retrieve elements by ID within the shadow subtree, enabling targeted manipulation without affecting the light DOM. For example, to attach an open shadow root:
const host = document.querySelector('my-component');
const shadow = host.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' });
shadow.innerHTML = '<p>Shadow content</p>';
Encapsulation in Shadow DOM provides strong style scoping: CSS rules defined within the shadow tree apply only to its descendants and do not leak to the light DOM, while external styles from the main document cannot penetrate the shadow boundary to target internal elements. This bidirectional isolation ensures component styles remain self-contained, reducing conflicts in complex applications. Exceptions exist for intentional exposure; the ::part() pseudo-element allows external styles to target specific internal elements marked with a part attribute (e.g., <button part="close"> can be styled as my-component::part(close) { color: red; }), and the ::slotted() pseudo-element enables styling of projected content within slots from outside the shadow.
The slotting mechanism facilitates content projection, where the <slot> element inside the shadow tree serves as a placeholder that displays children from the host's light DOM, effectively composing the shadow and light trees during rendering. Unnamed slots project all unassigned light DOM children as a group, while named slots use the slot attribute to match specific content (e.g., <slot name="header"></slot> receives elements with slot="header" from the light DOM). If no matching content is provided, the <slot> displays its fallback content, such as default markup between the opening and closing tags. This projection is dynamic and updates if light DOM children change. For instance, in a shadow tree with:
<div>
 <slot name="title">Default Title</slot>
 <slot></slot>
</div>
External usage like <my-component><h1 slot="title">Custom Title</h1><p>Body content</p></my-component> would render "Custom Title" in the named slot and "Body content" in the default slot, with "Default Title" shown only if no slot="title" content exists.
Recent extensions include Declarative Shadow DOM, a standardized feature in the HTML Living Standard that allows static creation of shadow roots without JavaScript by adding the shadowrootmode attribute to a <template> element adjacent to the host, with values "open" (accessible via shadowRoot) or "closed" (inaccessible). During HTML parsing, the browser processes the template to attach the shadow root directly, supporting server-side rendering and reducing reliance on script execution for component initialization; for example:
<my-component>
 <template shadowrootmode="open">
 <style>p { color: blue; }</style>
 <p>Declarative shadow content</p>
 </template>
</my-component>
This approach is supported in major browsers as of 2024.

HTML Templates

The HTML <template> element serves as an inert container for defining reusable fragments of markup and content that can be cloned and instantiated dynamically via JavaScript, enabling efficient content reuse without initial rendering or parsing overhead. Introduced in the HTML Living Standard by WHATWG, it allows developers to author HTML structures that remain dormant until explicitly activated, facilitating modular component design in Web Components.
Key properties of the <template> element include the content attribute, which returns a DocumentFragment representing the template's internal structure, allowing access to its child nodes without rendering them in the live DOM. Cloning is achieved through the cloneNode(true) method on the template or its content fragment, which deep-copies the entire subtree and produces an active, parseable copy that can then be inserted into the document. Upon insertion into the live DOM, the cloned content is "activated," meaning it undergoes normal HTML parsing, event handling, and rendering as if it were statically authored.
In the context of Web Components, <template> elements are commonly used to instantiate reusable content structures inside custom elements, such as populating a component's internal DOM or shadow root with predefined markup. For instance, a custom element might clone a template's content during its constructor or connected callback to generate dynamic UI parts, promoting declarative definitions of component internals. This approach is particularly valuable for avoiding runtime parsing costs, as the template's content is pre-parsed into a fragment during document loading.
Templates exhibit several limitations and specific behaviors to ensure their inert nature: they are not displayed or parsed in the initial DOM tree, and any scripts or event handlers within them do not execute until cloning and activation occur. Scripting inside templates requires manual invocation post-cloning, as the fragment itself does not support direct script execution, and certain elements like <html>, <head>, or <body> are ignored or stripped during processing. Additionally, templates support declarative shadow DOM integration via attributes like shadowrootmode, allowing a single <template> to define an entire encapsulated shadow root when attached to a custom element.
Overall, HTML templates enable declarative, performant content reuse in Web Components by providing a mechanism for inert fragments that activate seamlessly upon demand, often inserted into shadow DOM for scoped encapsulation without broader interference.

Practical Implementation

Defining and Extending Elements

Web Components enable developers to define new HTML elements by extending the HTMLElement base class and registering them via the customElements API. To create an autonomous custom element, a JavaScript class is defined that inherits from HTMLElement, where lifecycle methods such as connectedCallback and attributeChangedCallback can be implemented to handle element insertion, removal, or attribute changes. The class is then registered using customElements.define(name, Class), where the name must include a hyphen to distinguish it from standard HTML elements, ensuring it starts with a lowercase ASCII letter and avoids reserved names. This process allows the custom element to be used in HTML markup or created dynamically with document.createElement.
A practical example is a basic counter component that observes a count attribute and updates its display on changes. The class defines static observedAttributes = to enable reactive behavior, increments the count on button clicks, and dispatches events for external interaction. For encapsulation, a Shadow DOM is attached, and the display is updated based on the attribute value.
class Counter extends HTMLElement {
 static observedAttributes = ;
 constructor() {
 super();
 this.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' });
 this.shadowRoot.innerHTML = `
 <button id="counter">0</button>
 `;
 }
 connectedCallback() {
 const button = this.shadowRoot.querySelector('#counter');
 button.addEventListener('click', () => {
 const current = parseInt(this.getAttribute('count')) || (/page/0);
 const newCount = current + 1;
 this.setAttribute('count', newCount);
 this.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent('count-changed', { detail: newCount }));
 });
 this.updateDisplay();
 }
 attributeChangedCallback(name, oldValue, newValue) {
 if (name === 'count') {
 this.updateDisplay();
 }
 }
 updateDisplay() {
 const count = this.getAttribute('count') || '0';
 this.shadowRoot.querySelector('#counter').textContent = count;
 }
}
customElements.define('my-counter', Counter);
In HTML, it can be instantiated as <my-counter count="0"></my-counter>, with the attribute observation ensuring the display reflects updates.
To extend built-in elements, known as customized built-in elements, the class extends a specific built-in interface like HTMLButtonElement, and registration includes an options object with { extends: 'button' }. This allows customization of native behavior while preserving HTML semantics, such as form participation. The observedAttributes static getter remains available for attribute reactivity, triggering attributeChangedCallback on changes. For instance, a custom button might extend HTMLButtonElement to add a toggle state observed via a toggled attribute, updating its disabled state accordingly.
Error handling is crucial during definition and usage. Attempting to define an element with an invalid namelacking a hyphen, starting with uppercase, or using a reserved termresults in a SyntaxError. Redefining an existing custom element name throws a NotSupportedError, preventing overrides. For upgrade scenarios, where elements exist in the DOM before the script loads, customElements.(/page/Upgrade)(root) can be called on a root node to apply the definition retroactively, avoiding upgrade failures.
Extensions to the Custom Elements v1 specification include form-associated custom elements, allowing autonomous elements to integrate with HTML forms by setting static formAssociated = true in the class definition. Developers access form APIs via an ElementInternals instance obtained with this.attachInternals() in the constructor, enabling methods like internals.setFormValue(value) for submission data and internals.setValidity(state, message) for validation feedback. This supports custom form controls, such as a checkbox, by syncing properties like checked to form values and validity states, ensuring compatibility with form.elements, checkValidity(), and submission. For example:
class MyCheckbox extends HTMLElement {
 static formAssociated = true;
 constructor() {
 super();
 this.internals = this.attachInternals();
 this.checked = false;
 }
 get checked() {
 return this.hasAttribute('checked');
 }
 set checked(value) {
 if (value) {
 this.setAttribute('checked', '');
 this.internals.setFormValue('on');
 } else {
 this.removeAttribute('checked');
 this.internals.setFormValue(null);
 }
 }
}
customElements.define('my-checkbox', MyCheckbox);
This approach allows the element to participate in form validation and submission without altering the form's structure.

Encapsulating Styles and Behavior

Web Components achieve encapsulation of styles and behavior primarily through the Shadow DOM, which isolates a component's internal structure and presentation from the main document's DOM, preventing style leaks and global scope pollution. When combined with custom elements, this allows developers to define self-contained units that encapsulate their own CSS and JavaScript logic, ensuring that internal styles do not affect external elements and vice versa. This isolation is crucial for creating reusable, maintainable components in large-scale applications.
To attach a Shadow Root to a custom element, developers use the attachShadow() method on the element instance, specifying either an open or closed mode. In open mode, the Shadow Root is accessible from JavaScript outside the component via element.shadowRoot, enabling programmatic interaction while maintaining style isolation. For closed mode, the Shadow Root is not exposed externally, providing stricter encapsulation suitable for third-party libraries where internal access must be prevented to avoid tampering. Once attached, content can be injected using innerHTML for simple markup or appendChild() for dynamic nodes, including stylesheets and scripts.
class MyComponent extends HTMLElement {
 constructor() {
 super();
 const shadow = this.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' }); // or 'closed' for stricter isolation
 shadow.innerHTML = `
 <style>
 .internal { color: blue; } /* Styles scoped to shadow */
 </style>
 <div class="internal">Encapsulated content</div>
 `;
 }
}
customElements.define('my-component', MyComponent);
This approach ensures that CSS rules defined within the Shadow DOM apply only to its descendants, avoiding conflicts with the light DOM's styles.
Declarative Shadow DOM provides an alternative by allowing the shadow tree to be defined directly in HTML markup within the custom element, using a <template> element with a shadowrootmode attribute (e.g., shadowrootmode="open"). The browser parses this template into the shadow root automatically upon element creation. This method is particularly useful for server-side rendering and static site generation, as it avoids the need for JavaScript to attach the shadow programmatically.
Behavior implementation within the Shadow DOM involves adding event listeners to internal elements and using slots for content projection from the light DOM. Event listeners attached to shadow nodes handle interactions locally, such as button clicks, without propagating to the global scope unless explicitly dispatched. To communicate with the parent document, components can dispatch custom events from the shadow context to the light DOM, allowing external code to respond without direct access to internals. Slots, defined with the <slot> element, enable projection of external content into the shadow, maintaining encapsulation while supporting composition.
A practical example is an interactive modal component that encapsulates its open/close buttons, styling, and state management. The modal's shadow includes a backdrop and dialog with internal event handling for visibility toggling, using CSS custom properties (variables) for theming passed from the light DOM.
class ModalComponent extends HTMLElement {
 constructor() {
 super();
 const shadow = this.attachShadow({ mode: 'open' });
 shadow.innerHTML = `
 <style>
 :host { display: block; }
 .modal { display: none; background: var(--modal-bg, white); }
 .modal { display: block; }
 button { background: var(--button-bg, blue); }
 ::part(backdrop) { background: rgba(0,0,0,0.5); }
 </style>
 <div part="backdrop" class="backdrop"></div>
 <div class="modal" id="modal">
 <slot></slot>
 <button id="close">Close</button>
 </div>
 `;
 const closeBtn = shadow.getElementById('close');
 closeBtn.addEventListener('click', () => {
 this.removeAttribute('open');
 this.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent('modal-closed', { bubbles: true }));
 });
 this.addEventListener('click', (e) => {
 if (e.target === shadow.querySelector('.backdrop')) {
 this.removeAttribute('open');
 this.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent('modal-closed', { bubbles: true }));
 }
 });
 }
 connectedCallback() {
 if (this.hasAttribute('open')) {
 this.querySelector('#modal').setAttribute('open', '');
 }
 }
}
customElements.define('modal-component', ModalComponent);
In this modal, the ::part pseudo-element exposes specific parts (like the backdrop) for external styling, while CSS variables allow theming without breaking encapsulation. State, such as the open/closed status, is managed via attributes on the host element, observable from outside, ensuring controlled interaction.
Common behavior patterns emphasize state management confined to the shadow, preventing global variable pollution by using class fields or closures for internal data. Communication follows a properties-for-inputs and events-for-outputs model, where observed attributes update internal state and custom events notify changes, promoting unidirectional data flow. Closed mode is particularly useful for third-party components, such as embeddable widgets from ad networks, where exposing the shadow could enable malicious overrides of behavior.

Reusing Content with Templates

The HTML <template> element provides a mechanism for defining reusable fragments of markup that are not rendered until explicitly cloned and inserted into the document, making it integral to Web Components for efficient content reuse. This inert content is stored as a DocumentFragment accessible via the content property of the HTMLTemplateElement interface, allowing developers to instantiate the markup multiple times without reparsing HTML strings. In Web Components, templates enable the creation of modular, composable UI pieces by separating structure from instantiation logic.
Cloning and insertion occur by invoking template.content.cloneNode(true) to produce a deep copy of the fragment, which can then be appended to either the shadow DOM of a custom element or the light DOM. This process leverages the DocumentFragment to batch DOM mutations efficiently, avoiding direct manipulation of the live document tree during cloning. For instance, within a custom element's lifecycle callbacks, such as connectedCallback, the cloned content can be attached to the element's shadow root to render the component's initial structure.
Composition patterns with templates support building complex user interfaces through nesting, where inner templates define substructures that are cloned into outer ones. Parameterization is achieved via JavaScript data binding, such as setting attributes or text content on cloned nodes before insertion, while combining templates with <slot> elements allows dynamic content projection for further customization. This approach facilitates hierarchical reuse, such as composing a dashboard from multiple templated panels, each tailored by passed data.
A practical example is a reusable list-item component for displaying items in a data-driven list. Define a <template id="list-item-template"> with markup like <div class="item"><span class="title"></span><p class="description"></p></div>, then in the custom element class, clone the template per data item, set the text content of the designated elements with item-specific values (e.g., clone.querySelector('.title').textContent = item.title), and append clones to the shadow root. Attribute-based customization can extend this by observing changes to the element's attributes, such as data-theme, to re-clone and restyle the template accordingly.
Templates offer performance advantages by reducing DOM parsing overhead compared to constructing markup via string concatenation or innerHTML, as the content is pre-parsed into a fragment at definition time. For repeated use, developers can cache cloned instances or the original fragment to minimize redundant cloning operations, particularly in loops generating multiple similar elements.
In advanced scenarios, templates integrate seamlessly into custom element constructors for initial rendering, where a DocumentFragment from the template serves as the basis for the component's shadow DOM, ensuring efficient setup without blocking the main thread. This method aligns with Web Components' lifecycle for declarative instantiation, promoting scalable content reuse across applications.

Adoption and Compatibility

Browser Support

As of November 2025, Web Components enjoy broad native support across modern browsers, with global usage exceeding 94% for core features. Chrome and Edge provide full support for Custom Elements v1 since versions 67 and 79, respectively, while Firefox has supported it since version 63, and Safari offers partial support from version 10.1, limited to autonomous custom elements but excluding customized built-in elements due to a longstanding WebKit bug. Similarly, Shadow DOM v1 is fully supported in Chrome since version 53, Edge since 79, Firefox since 63 (with earlier versions requiring configuration flags), and Safari since version 10. The HTML Template element has been supported since 2012 in most browsers, with full implementation in Chrome from version 35, Edge from 15, Firefox from 22, and Safari from 9.
Historically, early experimental implementations relied on vendor prefixes, such as the -webkit- prefix for Shadow DOM in WebKit-based browsers like Safari, which allowed limited access to shadow trees via selectors like ::shadow or /deep/. These prefixed versions stemmed from the deprecated Shadow DOM v0 specification, which was an experimental API not adopted by other browsers and has since been fully removed in Chrome 80 and later, with no ongoing support in modern engines.
Developers can verify support using resources like caniuse.com for compatibility tables and browser developer tools for runtime feature detection, such as checking the existence of window.customElements, Element.prototype.attachShadow, or HTMLTemplateElement. A notable gap persists in form-associated custom elements, which enable custom elements to integrate with HTML forms like native inputs; these are supported in Chrome since version 77, Edge since 79, Firefox since 98, but only from Safari 16.4 onward. For legacy browsers like Internet Explorer, native support is absent, necessitating polyfills to enable partial functionality.
FeatureChromeEdgeFirefoxSafariGlobal Support
Custom Elements v167+79+63+10.1+ (partial)94.63%
Shadow DOM v153+79+63+10+94.64%
HTML Template35+15+22+9+94.88%
Form-associated Custom Elements77+79+98+16.4+93.43%

Polyfills and Fallback Strategies

Polyfills for Web Components are JavaScript libraries that provide fallback implementations for browsers lacking native support for the core APIs, such as Custom Elements, Shadow DOM, and HTML Templates. The most prominent example is webcomponentsjs, a suite originally developed as part of the Polymer project and now maintained by the WebComponents organization, which shims these APIs through techniques like DOM wrappers and proxies to mimic native behavior without altering the underlying document structure. These polyfills enable developers to write standard-compliant code that functions across a broader range of environments, particularly older browsers like Internet Explorer 11, by injecting compatibility layers at runtime.
Implementation strategies in polyfills like webcomponentsjs focus on emulating key features dynamically. For Custom Elements, dynamic upgrades use Mutation Observers to detect and upgrade existing elements in the DOM after the polyfill loads, ensuring that pre-existing markup is retrofitted without requiring a full page reload. Synthetic Shadow DOM achieves style and DOM isolation by constructing a virtual shadow tree alongside the native DOM, applying styles through CSS rules that target pseudo-elements and handling event retargeting to maintain encapsulation boundaries. Template emulation, meanwhile, replicates the <template> element's inert cloning behavior using JavaScript to parse and instantiate content on demand, preserving the declarative nature of templates in unsupported browsers.
Fallback strategies emphasize progressive enhancement, where Web Components are built atop a baseline of standard HTML, CSS, and JavaScript that degrades gracefully in unsupported environments, ensuring core functionality remains accessible. Feature detection plays a crucial role, with JavaScript checks like 'customElements' in window for Custom Elements v1 or HTMLElement.prototype.attachShadow for Shadow DOM to conditionally load polyfills only when needed, avoiding unnecessary overhead in modern browsers. CSS feature queries via @supports can also probe for related styling capabilities, such as selector(:host), to apply fallback styles progressively.
Despite their utility, polyfills introduce trade-offs, including performance overhead from continuous DOM monitoring and proxy interceptions, which can slow rendering as page complexity and element count increaseparticularly noticeable in large applications with many custom elements. Bundle size also grows, with the full webcomponentsjs bundle adding approximately 20-30 KB when gzipped, contributing to longer initial load times on slower networks. Maintenance challenges arise as native browser support improves, potentially leading to outdated shims that require ongoing updates or gradual phase-out.
In modern development, alternatives to traditional polyfills include build tools like Babel for transpiling JavaScript features to older syntax, though API-level shims remain necessary for Web Components specifics, and server-side rendering (SSR) frameworks such as Enhance, which pre-render components to HTML on the server for instant display before client-side hydration. These approaches reduce reliance on client-side polyfills by prioritizing native support in evergreen browsers and optimizing for progressive loading.

Tools and Ecosystem

Libraries and Frameworks

Lit is a lightweight library for building fast web components, featuring a reactive base class called LitElement that simplifies state management through property and state decorators, enabling efficient updates without full re-renders. It uses declarative templates via JavaScript tagged template literals and provides scoped styles to prevent CSS leakage, resulting in a minimal footprint of about 5 KB when minified and compressed. This design ensures components render quickly by updating only dynamic parts of the DOM, avoiding virtual DOM overhead.
Stencil, developed by the Ionic team, is a compiler that generates standards-compliant web components using TypeScript, JSX, and CSS, incorporating features like a virtual DOM for development and async rendering for performance. It produces components that are fully compatible with web standards, including prerendering and lazy loading, making them suitable for scalable libraries. Stencil's output works seamlessly across frameworks, with options to generate framework-specific wrappers for enhanced integration. Ionic, built on Stencil, provides a suite of pre-built web components for mobile and web applications.
FAST, from Microsoft, is an adaptive interface system built on web components and modern standards, offering tools like @microsoft/fast-element for synchronizing attributes and properties, MVVM patterns, and efficient template rendering. With a library size of around 10 KB (reducible to 4.5 KB via tree-shaking), it supports style composition and encapsulation, allowing developers to create responsive UIs that adapt to context without framework dependencies. FAST emphasizes browser-native compatibility, enabling components to integrate with any existing stack.
Major frameworks provide built-in support for web components to enhance reusability. Angular Elements packages Angular components as custom elements using the @angular/elements package and the createCustomElement() API, which registers them via customElements.define() for automatic bootstrapping in the DOM. This allows Angular logic to run as standard HTML tags, facilitating distribution without requiring Angular in the host environment. In React, web components can be wrapped using utilities like the @lit/react package, which provides createComponent() for prop mapping and event handling, along with useController() hooks for reactive state; React 19 further improves native support for property setting and events. Vue's defineCustomElement method converts Vue components into custom elements using familiar APIs for props, emits, templates, and styles, ensuring interoperability by reflecting props as attributes and dispatching events as CustomEvents.
These libraries and integrations offer key benefits, including reactive updates that minimize DOM manipulations for better performance, simplified state management through declarative bindings, and tooling for easy distribution as npm packages that remain framework-agnostic. For instance, developers can convert a Lit-based component, such as an interactive accordion, into a bundled web component that integrates directly into React or Vue applications without additional wrappers, preserving encapsulation and reactivity. Similarly, Stencil enables cross-framework applications by compiling components like a customizable button library usable in Angular, React, or vanilla HTML, with built-in support for lazy loading to optimize load times. Other notable libraries include Shoelace, a forward-thinking design system for building web components with accessible, customizable UI elements.
The web components ecosystem includes component marketplaces that promote sharing and discovery, such as Bit.dev, which supports versioning and distributing components, including web components, across teams and projects, often in conjunction with tools like Stencil. This supports modular development, allowing reusable components to be sourced from centralized repositories for faster assembly of applications.

Development Tools

Development of Web Components benefits from a range of specialized tools that streamline building, bundling, testing, debugging, and deployment processes. Build tools like Rollup with plugins such as @open-wc/building-rollup enable efficient bundling of custom elements and their dependencies, supporting ES modules and tree-shaking to minimize bundle sizes for production. Webpack plugins, including custom-elements-manifest for generating API documentation during builds, facilitate integration of Web Components into larger applications by handling shadow DOM encapsulation and asset optimization. Esbuild offers rapid compilation for Web Components, leveraging its Go-based architecture to transpile TypeScript and bundle assets up to 10-100x faster than traditional JavaScript bundlers, making it ideal for iterative development workflows. Additionally, tools like the Shadow DOM Analyzer extension for Chrome inspect and visualize shadow DOM structures, helping developers identify encapsulation issues and optimize style scoping without manual DOM traversal.
Testing Web Components requires frameworks that account for lifecycle methods like connectedCallback and attributeChangedCallback. The @web/test-runner from Open-WC provides a Karma-free unit testing environment tailored for custom elements, allowing simulation of DOM interactions and shadow DOM rendering in headless browsers. For end-to-end testing, Playwright supports custom elements by enabling selectors for shadow-piercing queries, such as >> css=::part or :has selectors, to verify component behavior across real user scenarios. Although the original Web Component Tester from the Polymer library was influential in early adoption, modern workflows favor @open-wc/testing-karma for legacy compatibility or direct integration with Jest for asserting lifecycle callbacks during unit tests.
Debugging tools enhance visibility into encapsulated components. Chrome DevTools features a dedicated Shadow DOM inspector in the Elements panel, where users can expand #shadow-root nodes to view and edit internal DOM trees, styles, and event listeners without affecting the light DOM. Visual Studio Code extensions, such as the Lit Plugin and Web Component snippets, provide autocompletion for custom element definitions, attribute props, and template literals, improving code intelligence during authoring. These tools integrate with the browser's protocol for live reloading and breakpoint setting on component constructors.
For distribution, publishing Web Components to npm involves tools like semantic-release for automated versioning based on commit messages, ensuring consistent package metadata including custom-elements.json manifests for IDE support. Storybook serves as a primary documentation generator, rendering isolated Web Components in interactive stories with addon support for props tables and accessibility audits, facilitating team collaboration and consumer onboarding. Analysis tools within npm, such as npm audit and bundle-phobia integration, evaluate dependency vulnerabilities and bundle impacts post-publish.
Workflow best practices emphasize scalable setups for component libraries. Monorepo tools like Nx or Turborepo manage multiple Web Component packages in a single repository, enabling shared tooling, atomic commits, and efficient caching for builds across variants. CI/CD pipelines, often implemented with GitHub Actions or Jenkins, incorporate cross-browser testing via services like BrowserStack, running @web/test-runner suites in parallel on Chrome, Firefox, and Safari to catch rendering discrepancies early. These practices reduce deployment friction and ensure compatibility in diverse environments.

Historical Development

Origins and Early Proposals

Prior to 2011, web developers faced significant challenges in creating reusable components due to the lack of standardized mechanisms for encapsulation and interoperability. Browsers relied on proprietary technologies, such as Mozilla's XML Binding Language (XBL), introduced in the early 2000s and refined in XBL 2.0 by 2007, which allowed binding XML documents to elements for custom behaviors in XUL and HTML. Similarly, Microsoft developed HTML Components (HTC) in 1998 for Internet Explorer, enabling behavioral attachments via external files to extend HTML elements without altering the core DOM. These solutions, while innovative, were browser-specific and non-interoperable, leading to duplicated efforts and the proliferation of JavaScript frameworks that trapped components within their ecosystems, exacerbating "framework fatigue" where developers struggled to share code across projects.
The push for native standards began in earnest in 2011 through Google's proposals, aiming to unify component creation across browsers. Alex Russell presented the foundational ideas at the Fronteers Conference, introducing "X-Tags" as an early concept for custom elements that would allow developers to define new HTML tags with encapsulated behaviors, evolving into the modern Custom Elements specification. Complementing this, Shadow DOM emerged as a key primitive for style and structure encapsulation, inspired by WebKit's existing implementations in browsers like Safari and Chrome, where it hid internal details of native elements such as video controls and sliders to prevent external interference. Dimitri Glazkov, a Google engineer and primary architect, detailed Shadow DOM in a January 2011 blog post, emphasizing its roots in SVG's subtree isolation and WebKit's techniques for separating implementation from public APIs, positioning it as essential for building robust, reusable widgets without relying on iframes or proprietary hacks.
Early experimentation accelerated these ideas, with Google's Polymer library serving as a 2013 proof-of-concept polyfill that implemented the proposed APIs in JavaScript, demonstrating how Custom Elements, Shadow DOM, and HTML Templates could enable declarative, framework-agnostic components. Glazkov, alongside collaborators like Alex Komoroske and Russell, drove the initiative from a 2010 internal project called "Parkour," motivated by experiences building over a dozen incompatible framework systems and the need for portable, optimizable components that "say what you mean" without excess boilerplate. Initial specifications took shape through WHATWG discussions in 2011, including use cases for a component model, and W3C working drafts like the May 2012 "Introduction to Web Components," which outlined decorators, custom elements, and Shadow DOM to address the fatigue from non-standard solutions and foster a unified web platform.

Standardization Milestones

The standardization of Web Components has progressed through iterative specifications managed primarily by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group (WHATWG), focusing on Custom Elements, Shadow DOM, and HTML Templates as core technologies. Custom Elements v0, introduced experimentally in 2013, emphasized polyfill-based implementations to enable custom HTML tags with defined behaviors, laying groundwork for broader adoption despite limited native browser support. This version evolved into v1 by 2016, achieving stability as a WHATWG standard that allowed full integration with the DOM, including lifecycle callbacks and upgrade mechanisms, and was adopted across major browsers. Similarly, Shadow DOM v0 emerged in 2013 as a polyfill-driven API for encapsulating styles and markup, but faced interoperability challenges until v1 stabilized in 2016, introducing robust scoping and insertion points via slots for better component isolation.
HTML Templates, essential for reusable content fragments in Web Components, matured as part of the HTML5 recommendation in 2014, enabling inert markup that could be cloned without rendering until activated by script, with ongoing refinements in the WHATWG Living Standard to support dynamic instantiation. By 2018, these specifications converged under the broader DOM standard, with W3C publishing Custom Elements as a Recommendation on May 3 and Shadow DOM on March 1, marking a pivotal unification that integrated them into core web platform APIs for consistent behavior across engines. In 2021, form-associated custom elements were extended in the WHATWG HTML specification, allowing custom elements to participate natively in form submission, validation, and reset cycles via the ElementInternals interface, enhancing usability for interactive controls.
Proposals for declarative Shadow DOM, which enable Shadow DOM attachment directly in HTML without JavaScript, gained momentum from 2023 onward through W3C Community Group discussions, with prototypes tested in browsers and stabilization efforts targeting full Recommendation status by 2025 to support server-side rendering and static generation. Community input has been instrumental, facilitated by the W3C Web Components Community Group (CG) through regular meetings, collaborative projects on GitHub repositories like w3c/webcomponents-cg, and interoperability testing via the Web Platform Tests (WPT) suite, which verifies cross-browser compliance for features like custom element upgrades and shadow boundary events. As of 2025, the WHATWG Living Standard includes enhancements to event handling in Shadow DOM, such as improved dispatch across boundaries, and accessibility APIs via ElementInternals for better ARIA integration and form labeling, ensuring components meet evolving WCAG guidelines without external dependencies.

Best Practices and Considerations

Performance and Optimization

Web Components, while offering encapsulation and reusability, can introduce performance bottlenecks related to their core APIs. Shadow DOM boundary traversals, where styles, events, or queries cross from the light DOM to the shadow tree, can incur overhead during rendering and interaction, as the browser must resolve these crossings without full isolation. Frequent invocations of lifecycle callbacks, such as connectedCallback or attributeChangedCallback, add computational cost if they involve heavy operations like DOM manipulations or computations, potentially slowing element upgrades and updates. Template cloning overhead arises when instantiating components, as the browser must duplicate the <template> content into the shadow root, which scales poorly with large or numerous templates.
To mitigate these issues, developers employ targeted optimization strategies. Lazy loading components through dynamic imports defers parsing and execution until needed, reducing initial bundle size and improving time-to-interactive metrics. Minimizing shadow depth by flattening the DOM structure within the shadow rootsuch as avoiding nested custom elementslimits traversal costs during layout and painting. Applying CSS containment via the contain property (e.g., contain: layout style (/page/Paint)) signals to the browser that the component's subtree is self-contained, enabling optimizations like skipping external layout queries and accelerating rendering.
Performance measurement relies on browser tools tailored for auditing components. Google Lighthouse provides comprehensive audits, scoring aspects like largest contentful paint and total blocking time while flagging issues such as excessive DOM size or unused JavaScript in components. Chrome DevTools' Performance panel allows profiling re-renders by recording traces of lifecycle events and DOM updates, revealing bottlenecks like repeated callback firings or cloning delays.
Best practices emphasize efficient implementation to maintain runtime speed. Constructors should avoid synchronous heavy lifting, such as network requests or complex calculations, deferring them to asynchronous lifecycle methods instead. Batching DOM updatesgrouping multiple changes into a single requestAnimationFrame cycleprevents unnecessary reflows and repaints within the shadow DOM. In browsers with native support, prioritizing built-in APIs over polyfills eliminates shim-induced overhead, ensuring components leverage optimized engine implementations.
As of 2025, emerging trends focus on integrating WebAssembly (Wasm) for handling complex computations in components, such as data processing or graphics rendering, which offloads work from JavaScript and can significantly reduce the overall JS footprint in performance-critical scenarios. This approach enables near-native speeds for intricate Web Components, particularly in applications like interactive dashboards, while maintaining encapsulation.

Security and Accessibility

Web Components provide encapsulation through Shadow DOM, which helps mitigate certain security risks by isolating internal styles and scripts from the main document. However, vulnerabilities such as cross-site scripting (XSS) can still arise when untrusted content is projected into slots or propagated via custom events, potentially allowing malicious scripts to execute within the component's context. To counter these, developers should implement Content Security Policy (CSP) headers to restrict script sources and enforce strict policies that block inline execution, alongside sanitizing all inputs before insertion into Shadow DOM to prevent injection attacks.
For enhanced sandboxing, using closed Shadow DOM modespecified via attachShadow({ mode: 'closed' })prevents external JavaScript from accessing the internal ShadowRoot, thereby protecting sensitive implementation details like private data handling from unauthorized extraction or manipulation. This mode acts as a stronger barrier than open Shadow DOM, limiting interference while still allowing declarative usage through <template shadowrootmode="closed"> for environments without JavaScript. Additionally, constructors of custom elements should avoid the eval() function, as it evaluates strings as code and introduces risks of code injection, especially with dynamic inputs; safer alternatives like Function constructors or pre-parsed templates are recommended instead.
On the accessibility front, integrating ARIA attributes into custom elements ensures screen readers and assistive technologies can interpret component semantics correctly; for instance, applying role="button" and tabindex="0" to interactive elements, along with dynamic updates via aria-live="polite", conveys state changes effectively. Semantic slot usage further supports this by allowing light DOM content to provide meaningful structure, such as named slots for titles (<slot name="title">) that maintain logical hierarchies without relying solely on Shadow DOM internals. Focus management across shadow boundaries is crucial for keyboard navigation, involving techniques like trapping focus within modals (e.g., cycling Tab keys among focusable descendants) and restoring prior focus on component disconnection to prevent user disorientation.
To achieve WCAG compliance, Web Components must adhere to guidelines emphasizing perceivable and operable content, such as assigning appropriate ARIA roles (e.g., role="dialog" for modals) and ensuring form elements have associated labels via <label for="id"> or aria-labelledby. Tools like axe-core facilitate testing by automating checks against WCAG 2.1 and 2.2 success criteria (Levels A, AA, AAA), including validation of ARIA roles and labels within Shadow DOM, and integrating seamlessly into CI pipelines for ongoing compliance.
In 2025, supply-chain attacks targeting npm packagessuch as the September incident compromising 18 widely used libraries like with over 2.6 billion weekly downloadshighlighted risks to Web Component ecosystems reliant on third-party dependencies, potentially introducing malware via malicious updates. Recommendations include pinning specific versions in build processes, regularly updating to patched releases, and employing software bill of materials (SBOM) tools for vulnerability detection to safeguard component libraries.

Community Involvement

Standards Bodies and Contributions

The development and maintenance of Web Components standards involve collaboration among several key organizations. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) hosts the Web Components Community Group, an informal, open forum dedicated to advancing libraries, tools, documentation, and standards for Web Components to improve interoperability and ecosystem growth. The Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group (WHATWG) plays a central role in integrating Web Components features, such as Custom Elements, into the HTML Living Standard, ensuring seamless embedding within core web technologies. Additionally, Ecma International's Technical Committee 39 (TC39) supports alignment by standardizing ECMAScript features like classes and modules, which are foundational to implementing Web Components in JavaScript.
Contributions to these standards follow established open processes. Developers and organizations file issues and submit pull requests on GitHub repositories, including the WICG/webcomponents repo for specification discussions and the WHATWG/dom repo for DOM-related aspects. Participation also includes joining W3C Community Group meetings, which are accessible to anyone upon group membership, and submitting interoperability tests to the Web Platform Tests (WPT) project to verify cross-browser behavior.
Major contributors include Google, which has driven the initiative since its inception with early proposals and Chrome implementations; Mozilla, through Firefox support and specification feedback; and Apple, via Safari integration and vendor collaboration. This effort embodies an open-source ethos, bolstered by corporate resources from these browser vendors to foster broad adoption.
Governance adopts a living standards model, led by WHATWG for continuous, iterative updates to reflect real-world implementation needs, complemented by W3C's yearly community reports and snapshots emphasizing interoperability.
As of 2025, work continues on enhancements such as improved module integration and declarative custom elements, tracked through ongoing WICG and Community Group discussions.

Resources and Further Reading

For comprehensive learning on Web Components, the Mozilla Developer Network (MDN) provides extensive tutorials and API references covering custom elements, Shadow DOM, HTML templates, and slots. The WHATWG living standards detail the foundational specifications, including Custom Elements for defining new HTML tags and Shadow DOM for encapsulation. Relevant sections of the WHATWG HTML Living Standard further elaborate on integration with the broader HTML ecosystem, such as custom element lifecycle and parsing rules.
Books like Web Components in Action by Ben Farrell offer practical guidance on building reusable components from scratch, emphasizing design patterns and real-world applications. Online courses and modules, such as freeCodeCamp's introduction to Web Components, provide hands-on exercises for beginners to create custom elements with encapsulated styles and behavior. Google's web.dev platform hosts interactive guides on Web Components fundamentals, including best practices for component architecture and browser compatibility.
Sample code repositories on GitHub, including MDN's web-components-examples, demonstrate practical implementations like popovers and sliders using native APIs. The webcomponents organization maintains reference examples and polyfills for broader adoption. Component galleries such as webcomponents.org showcase community-built elements, allowing exploration of diverse use cases like form controls and data visualizations.
Conference talks from events like JSConf and Chrome Dev Summit highlight evolving features; for instance, sessions in 2024 discussed declarative Shadow DOM enhancements for easier authoring without JavaScript. Conference talks from events like JSConf and Chrome Dev Summit continue to highlight evolving features in Web Components.
Active communities around libraries like Lit and tools from open-wc provide testing, building, and deployment support for Web Components.
Interactive tools aid exploration, such as the Web Component DevTools browser extension, which enables inspection of custom elements, Shadow DOM trees, and attribute changes directly in Chrome DevTools. Component galleries like component.gallery offer visual demos of UI patterns built with Web Components for quick prototyping and inspiration.

References

Web Components - Web APIs - MDN Web Docs - Mozilla

HTML Standard

Custom Elements v1 - Reusable Web Components | Articles - web.dev

DOM Standard

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components/Using_shadow_DOM

HTML Standard

HTML Standard - whatwg

Introduction - webcomponents.org

Custom Elements - W3C

CSS Scoping Module Level 1

Shadow DOM - W3C

Element: attachShadow() method - Web APIs | MDN

ShadowRoot - Web APIs | MDN

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Selectors/::part

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Selectors/::slotted

Declarative Shadow DOM - WebKit

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/template

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/scripting.html#dom-template-content

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/scripting.html#template-contents-activation

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/template#usage_notes

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/template#inertness

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/scripting.html#template-contents

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/template#declarative_shadow_dom

Using custom elements - Web APIs | MDN

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/custom-elements.html#valid-custom-element-name

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/custom-elements.html#custom-element-constructor

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/custom-elements.html#form-associated-custom-elements

https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/custom-elements.html#elementinternals

ElementInternals - Web APIs | MDN

HTMLTemplateElement - Web APIs | MDN

Using templates and slots - Web APIs | MDN

Custom Elements (V1) | Can I use... Support tables for ... - CanIUse

https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=182671

Shadow DOM (V1) | Can I use... Support tables for HTML5, CSS3, etc

HTML templates | Can I use... Support tables for HTML5, CSS3, etc

Deprecations and Removals in Chrome 70 | Blog

https://caniuse.com/?search=web%20components

Form-associated custom elements | Can I use... Support ... - CanIUse

Polyfills - webcomponents.org

webcomponents/webcomponentsjs: A suite of polyfills ... - GitHub

Progressive enhancement - Glossary - MDN Web Docs

IE11 performance question #215 - webcomponents/polyfills - GitHub

How to think about Baseline and polyfills | Articles - web.dev

What is Lit? Lit

Stencil - A Compiler for Web Components

Introduction - Microsoft FAST

Custom Elements Angular

React - Lit

Vue.js

https://bit.dev/blog/introducing-stencil-component-development-environment-lfs5dfqw

Bit.dev

Why Web Components are Making a Comeback in 2025?

XBL 2.0 - Mozilla

Alex Russell | Web Components and Model Driven Views - Vimeo

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TzR8fZ8-1tA

What the Heck is Shadow DOM? - Dimitri Glazkov

Polymer declarative, encapsulated, reusable components

Web Components: The Long Game - Infrequently Noted

2011 December - The WHATWG Blog

Introduction to Web Components - W3C

Shadow DOM V0, Custom Elements V0, HTML Imports

What are the differences between Custom Elements v0 and v1?

What's New in Shadow DOM v1 (by examples) - hayato

Declarative Shadow DOM Issue #831 whatwg/dom - GitHub

Web Components Community Group: 2023 Spec/API status

w3c/webcomponents-cg: Web Components community group - GitHub

Web Components Community Group - W3C

Is it good or bad for browser performance to have many Shadow ...

Web Components rendering performance - javascript - Stack Overflow

How fast are web components? - Plain Vanilla Web

An Approach to Lazy Loading Custom Elements - CSS-Tricks

Optimize DOM size | Performance insights - Chrome for Developers

Helping Browsers Optimize With The CSS Contain Property

Lighthouse performance scoring - Chrome for Developers

How to Use Chrome DevTools for Performance Audits - NitroPack

Efficient DOM Manipulation and JavaScript Optimization Techniques

JavaScript in 2025: 7 Trends That Are Reshaping Web Development

7 Cutting-Edge Web Development Trends in 2025 | Avantia Inc.

 SHADOW DOM ATTACKS AND PREVENTION METHODS - troindia

Mitigate cross-site scripting (XSS) with a strict Content Security ...

Web Components: Working With Shadow DOM - Smashing Magazine

eval() - JavaScript - MDN Web Docs - Mozilla

Building Accessible Web Components: A Deep Dive into ARIA Best ...

Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1 - W3C

dequelabs/axe-core: Accessibility engine for automated Web UI testing

Breakdown: Widespread npm Supply Chain Attack Puts Billions of ...

ECMAScript 2026 Language Specification - TC39

WICG/webcomponents: Web Components specifications - GitHub

Participants in the Web Components Community Group - W3C

GitHub - web-platform-tests/wpt: Test suites for Web platform specs

The state of Web Components - Mozilla Hacks

Standards WHATWG

Web Components Community Group: 2022 Spec/API status

A Brief Introduction to Web Components - freeCodeCamp

mdn/web-components-examples: A series of web ... - GitHub

Web Components - GitHub

webcomponents.org

Componentize the Web - YouTube

JSConf 2025 Speakers Announced - OpenJS Foundation

https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/web-component-devtools/gdniinfdlmmmjpnhgnkmfpffipenjljo

The Component Gallery
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion