WebDAV Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
WebDAV
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV) is a set of extensions to the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) that enables users and user agents to collaboratively author, edit, and manage resources on remote web servers. Defined in RFC 4918, WebDAV builds upon HTTP/1.1 by introducing new methods, headers, and resource properties to support operations such as creating collections (analogous to directories), retrieving and updating metadata, copying and moving resources within a namespace, and implementing locking to prevent overwrite conflicts during concurrent editing. This protocol transforms the web from a primarily read-only medium into a writable, collaborative environment suitable for distributed file management and content authoring.
The development of WebDAV originated in 1996 when E. James Whitehead, then at the University of California, Irvine, collaborated with the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) to address limitations in early web authoring tools, such as the lack of overwrite protection and namespace management. In response, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) formed the WebDAV working group in 1997, with Whitehead as its founder and chair, to standardize HTTP extensions for remote collaborative authoring. The group's initial specification, RFC 2518, was published as a Proposed Standard in February 1999, outlining core functionality for properties, collections, and locking. This was later obsoleted and refined in RFC 4918 in June 2007 to clarify ambiguities, improve internationalization support, and align with HTTP/1.1 advancements.
At its core, WebDAV extends HTTP with seven new methodsPROPFIND for retrieving resource properties, PROPPATCH for modifying them, MKCOL for creating collections, COPY and MOVE for namespace operations, and LOCK and UNLOCK for concurrency controlalong with extensions to the existing OPTIONS method to report server capabilities. Resources in WebDAV are identified by URIs and can have dead properties (server-managed metadata) or live properties (protocol-defined behaviors like lock discovery). Collections function like hierarchical folders, allowing recursive operations, while locking supports shared or exclusive modes with timeouts to facilitate multi-user scenarios without data loss.
Beyond the base protocol, the WebDAV working group developed several extensions to address advanced needs, including the Access Control Protocol (ACL) in RFC 3744 for managing permissions on resources, ordered collections in RFC 3648 for maintaining server-defined sequences of members, redirect references in RFC 4437 for handling symbolic links, and SEARCH (DASL) in RFC 5323 for querying resources. Versioning capabilities were explored through the DeltaV extension (RFC 3253), enabling check-in/check-out workflows, baselines, and history tracking, though it saw limited adoption compared to the core protocol.
WebDAV has been widely implemented in servers like Apache mod_dav, Nginx, and Microsoft IIS, as well as clients including Microsoft Office applications for direct publishing and various operating systems' file explorers for mounting remote shares. However, Microsoft deprecated the WebClient service for WebDAV in Windows in November 2023, though server support in IIS continues and third-party implementations remain active. It remains relevant in modern contexts such as cloud file synchronization (e.g., in services like Nextcloud), calendar and contact management via CalDAV and CardDAV derivatives, and integration with version control systems like Subversion. Despite challenges like security considerations in HTTP-based file access, including a remote code execution vulnerability in Microsoft implementations patched in June 2025 (CVE-2025-33053), WebDAV's standardization has facilitated interoperable, web-native collaboration tools.

Overview

Definition and Purpose

Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV) is an extension to the Hypertext Transfer Protocol version 1.1 (HTTP/1.1), standardized by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), that enables the creation, modification, and management of resources on remote web servers in a collaborative manner. It defines a set of methods, headers, and content types that build upon HTTP to support distributed authoring, allowing clients to interact with web servers as if they were remote file systems. This protocol facilitates operations such as uploading, editing, and organizing files directly over the web, without relying on separate protocols like FTP.
The primary purpose of WebDAV is to transform HTTP from a primarily read-only retrieval mechanism into a fully writable and collaborative medium, enabling users to perform authoring tasks including copying, moving, and deleting resources on a server. By extending HTTP with these capabilities, WebDAV allows seamless management of web content, treating servers as extensible storage repositories accessible via standard web infrastructure. This addresses the original limitations of basic HTTP, which lacked built-in support for such file system-like interactions.
WebDAV emerged in the late 1990s as part of IETF efforts to enhance web protocols for content management, with its core specification published in 1999. It provides key benefits such as enabling remote document collaboration among multiple users, integrating with operating system file explorers and dedicated clients for intuitive access, and providing concurrency control through resource properties and locks to prevent overwrites. These features promote efficient, distributed workflows for web-based authoring without the need for proprietary tools.

Key Features

WebDAV extends the stateless nature of HTTP by introducing stateful interactions, such as resource locking, which enable collaborative authoring while maintaining compatibility with standard web infrastructure.
A core feature is support for namespaces through hierarchical URLs, allowing resources to be organized in a tree-like structure that mirrors file system directories, facilitating distributed management across servers. Collections function as directories, enabling the creation, deletion, and navigation of grouped resources, which supports scalable organization of content in shared environments.
Properties serve as metadata attached to resources, including server-managed live properties (e.g., creation dates) and client-defined dead properties, allowing rich description and querying of resources without altering their content. Locking mechanisms provide concurrency control by permitting exclusive or shared locks on resources, preventing overwrite conflicts during multi-user editing sessions and ensuring data integrity in collaborative scenarios.
Resource discovery is facilitated through mechanisms that retrieve properties and collection memberships, enabling users to explore and assess resources efficiently. Property management supports status reporting and updates, allowing participants to modify metadata and receive feedback on resource states during joint workflows.
Unlike plain HTTP's focus on retrieval, WebDAV integrates seamlessly with operating systems, permitting servers to be mounted as network drives in tools like Windows Explorer or macOS Finder, where resources appear and behave as local files for intuitive access and editing. This mounting capability bridges web protocols with desktop file management, enhancing usability for distributed teams without requiring specialized software.

History

Development Origins

The development of WebDAV originated in 1996 when E. James Whitehead, then at the University of California, Irvine, collaborated with the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) to address limitations in early web authoring tools, such as the lack of overwrite protection and namespace management. In response, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) formed the WWW Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV) working group in 1997. Chaired by Jim Whitehead, with significant contributions from Greg Stein, the group aimed to standardize HTTP extensions for distributed web content authoring to meet the growing demands of web-based collaboration.
Initial working group drafts, including requirements documents, emerged in 1997, explicitly targeting the web's inherent read-only constraints by proposing mechanisms for resource manipulation and metadata handling. These efforts built on the recognition that the original HTTP/1.1 specification lacked support for collaborative editing, prompting a focus on interoperability across diverse authoring tools.
Prior to formal RFC publication, pre-standardization prototypes played a crucial role in validating the protocol's design. In the late 1990s, Microsoft developed early implementations to enable features such as web folders, allowing users to treat HTTP servers as navigable file systems for direct editing. Microsoft's Web Folders, integrated into Internet Explorer 5.0 in 1999, represented one such prototype that demonstrated practical WebDAV-like functionality for remote content management. These experimental efforts highlighted the protocol's potential while informing iterative refinements in the working group.
A primary motivation behind WebDAV's inception was addressing key challenges in collaborative web environments, particularly the absence of versioning and locking mechanisms in early content management systems. Without standardized locking, concurrent edits risked data overwrites, while the lack of versioning hindered tracking changes in shared resourcesissues exacerbated by the web's shift toward dynamic, multi-user applications in the late 1990s. By prioritizing these features, the working group sought to transform the web into a viable platform for distributed, version-aware authoring.

Standardization Milestones

The initial standardization of WebDAV occurred with the publication of RFC 2518 in February 1999, which defined it as an experimental extension to HTTP for distributed authoring and versioning. This document introduced core methods like PROPFIND, PROPPATCH, MKCOL, COPY, MOVE, LOCK, and UNLOCK, establishing the foundational protocol for collaborative web resource management.
A significant revision came with RFC 4918 in June 2007, which obsoleted RFC 2518 and advanced WebDAV to Proposed Standard status, incorporating clarifications on method behaviors, improved error handling, and interoperability enhancements based on implementation experience. This update refined resource properties, namespace handling, and status codes, such as introducing 507 Insufficient Storage, to better support practical deployments.
Subsequent advancements included RFC 5789 in March 2010, which standardized the PATCH method for partial resource updates, enabling more efficient modifications in WebDAV contexts without full resource replacement. For calendar integration, RFC 4791 in March 2007 defined CalDAV as extensions to WebDAV for iCalendar data, facilitating scheduling and event management. Similarly, RFC 6352 in August 2011 specified CardDAV for vCard-based contact resources, extending WebDAV for address book operations, though no major revisions to the core protocol have occurred since 2007, with maintenance focused on extensions and errata.
The IETF WebDAV Working Group concluded its activities in March 2007, transitioning oversight to ad-hoc updates and individual submissions rather than formal group milestones.
As of 2025, WebDAV remains at Proposed Standard maturity level per RFC 4918, with minor errata addressed through IETF processes and interoperability profiles published to aid adoption; while no full core revision has been issued, implementations have integrated it with modern protocols like HTTP/2 for improved performance in contemporary environments.

Standards and Specifications

Core Protocol RFCs

The core protocol for WebDAV was initially defined in RFC 2518, published in February 1999 as a Proposed Standard that extended HTTP/1.1 to support distributed authoring and versioning capabilities. This document introduced key concepts such as resource properties, collections, and methods for managing them, but it contained several ambiguities and inconsistencies in areas like namespace handling and error reporting that hindered interoperability among implementations.
These issues were addressed and the protocol refined in RFC 4918, published in June 2007 as the proposed standard that obsoleted RFC 2518. RFC 4918 specifies HTTP extensions for Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV), defining seven new methodsincluding PROPFIND for retrieving properties, PROPPATCH for modifying them, MKCOL for creating collections, COPY and MOVE for resource manipulation, and LOCK/UNLOCK for concurrency controlalong with new status codes such as 207 Multi-Status to handle partial successes in multi-operation requests. It also establishes the use of XML for encoding property values and introduces the DAV: XML namespace to avoid conflicts with other XML vocabularies, ensuring structured representation of metadata like resource creation dates or authorship.
WebDAV's integration with HTTP relies on the foundational HTTP/1.1 semantics outlined in RFC 2616 (June 1999), which has since been updated and split into the RFC 7230 series (2014), providing the core messaging framework, including request methods, headers, and status codes that WebDAV builds upon. For interoperability, RFC 4918 mandates specific behaviors in compliant implementations, such as precise handling of the Depth header in operations like PROPFIND to control search scope (e.g., limiting to the resource itself or including subordinates), and requires servers to support mandatory properties like DAV:resourcetype for identifying collections versus non-collections. These requirements promote consistent behavior across clients and servers, facilitating reliable remote management of web resources.

Working Group Documents

The WebDAV working group within the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) produced several key documents that extended the core protocol to support advanced collaborative features, such as versioning, access control, and resource management, building on the foundational HTTP methods for authoring. These documents, primarily in the form of Request for Comments (RFCs), addressed limitations in the baseline specification by introducing mechanisms for maintaining resource histories, enforcing permissions, and handling multiple references to the same resource, thereby enhancing WebDAV's utility for distributed team environments.
One of the primary extensions is DeltaV, specified in RFC 3253 (2002), which provides versioning and configuration management capabilities for WebDAV resources. DeltaV introduces concepts like workspaces, versions, and baselines to track changes over time, allowing users to create version-controlled histories without disrupting ongoing work. Key methods include CHECKOUT, which prepares a resource for editing by creating a checked-out version, and CHECKIN, which commits changes and generates a new version; these enable baseline versioning where a collection of resources can be treated as a single configurable unit. Additionally, DeltaV supports activities for grouping related changes and properties for metadata like version names and labels, facilitating collaborative development.
Access control in WebDAV is addressed by the ACL specification in RFC 3744 (2004), which defines a framework for managing permissions on resources using access control lists (ACLs). This document introduces principal resources to represent users or groups and privilege sets, such as DAV:read for viewing content, DAV:write for modifications, and DAV:unlock for releasing locks. ACLs are stored as properties on resources, allowing fine-grained control over operations like PROPFIND and COPY, with inheritance from parent collections to simplify administration. The specification also outlines abstract grants and denies, ensuring compatibility with diverse authentication mechanisms while preventing common security issues like over-permissive access.
The Binding protocol, detailed in RFC 5842 (2010), extends WebDAV to support multiple bindings for a single resource, enabling redirects and alternative URIs without duplicating content. It defines the BIND method to create a new binding (e.g., an additional URI pointing to the same resource) and the UNBIND method to remove one, preserving the resource's state across bindings. This is particularly useful for scenarios like hierarchical views or load balancing, where a resource might be accessible via multiple paths; the specification includes rules for handling collections and prohibits certain operations on bind-aware resources to maintain consistency. Bindings integrate with core WebDAV methods, such as allowing PROPFIND to resolve across redirects.
WebDAV SEARCH (also known as DASL), specified in RFC 5323 (2008), provides a framework for querying and searching resources using SQL-like query languages or other schemata. It introduces the SEARCH method and related report formats to enable clients to discover resources based on properties, content, or other criteria, supporting both basic and advanced search scopes with extensibility for custom query grammars. This extension enhances WebDAV's capabilities for information retrieval in large-scale collections.
Redirect references in WebDAV are defined in RFC 4437 (2006), an experimental specification that allows resources to act as symbolic links or redirects to other URIs. It introduces the REBIND method for updating reference targets and properties for reference discovery, enabling efficient handling of aliases without content duplication. This is useful for maintaining links in dynamic environments, with safeguards against cycles and integration with core methods like COPY and MOVE.
Collaborative ordering of resources within collections is covered in RFC 3648 (2002), the WebDAV Ordered Collections Protocol, which allows servers to maintain a defined sequence for member resources. This document introduces properties like DAV:ordered-by to specify ordering criteria (e.g., by name or custom index) and methods such as ORDERPATCH to reorder members without altering the collection's content. It supports partial ordering for dynamic lists and ensures compatibility with existing WebDAV operations, such as MKCOL for creating ordered collections, thereby aiding applications like playlists or workflows that require predictable traversal. These features originated from Internet-Drafts within the working group and were standardized to promote interoperability in ordered resource management.

Additional IETF Publications

The WebDAV Current Principal Extension, outlined in RFC 5397 (2008), introduces the <DAV:current-user-principal> property to enable clients to retrieve the principal resource URL associated with the currently authenticated HTTP user. This property serves as an extension to the WebDAV Access Control Protocol defined in the working group documents, allowing servers to efficiently identify the current user for access control evaluations without requiring separate PROPFIND requests or authentication exchanges. By providing this direct mapping, the extension reduces latency in scenarios involving protected resources and supports more dynamic permission checks in collaborative environments.
RFC 5689 (2009) extends the HTTP MKCOL method within WebDAV to permit the creation of collections with specified resource types and initial property values, addressing limitations in the original specification for initializing structured resources. This individual submission updates core WebDAV behaviors in RFC 4918 and related protocols like CalDAV (RFC 4791), enabling clients to set properties such as access controls or metadata at collection creation time, thereby streamlining resource setup in authenticated sessions. The extension complements authentication mechanisms by facilitating immediate application of principal-based configurations during resource provisioning.
Metadata mappings for WebDAV properties, particularly for standards like Dublin Core, are specified in the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative's guideline document, which defines conventions such as using the <DAV:creator> property name to represent the dc:creator element. This mapping allows WebDAV servers to integrate widely adopted metadata vocabularies as live or dead properties, promoting interoperability for resource description without altering the core protocol. Servers implementing this can expose Dublin Core elements via standard PROPPATCH and PROPFIND operations, enhancing searchability and cataloging in distributed authoring systems.
RFC 6638 (2012), while primarily an extension to CalDAV, provides scheduling features applicable to broader WebDAV implementations by defining new methods like SCHEDULE-INBOX-URL and SCHEDULE-OUTBOX-URL reports for managing calendar invitations and responses. These mechanisms build on WebDAV's resource model to support asynchronous collaboration, such as free-busy queries and reply handling, and can be adapted for non-calendaring use cases involving principal interactions. The specification ensures compatibility with WebDAV ACL basics, where access decisions rely on authenticated principals for scheduling operations.

Technical Details

HTTP Extensions and Methods

WebDAV extends HTTP/1.1 by defining new methods that support distributed authoring capabilities, such as creating hierarchical structures, copying and moving resources, managing metadata properties, and controlling concurrent access. These methods operate on uniform resource identifiers (URIs) and leverage HTTP's request-response model while introducing XML-based bodies for structured data exchange.
The MKCOL method creates a new collection (analogous to a directory) at the specified URI, with the request body optionally containing initial properties or subcollections; a successful response returns 201 Created if the collection is newly established. The COPY method duplicates a resource to a specified destination, supporting shallow or deep copies via the Depth header, and returns 201 Created for new resources or 200 OK for overwrites. Similarly, the MOVE method relocates a resource by combining semantics of COPY and DELETE, requiring server-side atomicity for the operation.
For property management, the PROPFIND method retrieves properties from a resource or collection, with the request body specifying which properties to return (such as all live properties via <allprop/> or specific ones via <prop/> elements); it supports querying the resource itself, its members, or recursively. The PROPPATCH method modifies properties by setting, removing, or replacing them in an XML body, returning 200 OK on success with a multistatus report of changes. Properties queried via PROPFIND provide metadata about resources, as covered in the Resource Properties section. To address concurrency, the LOCK method establishes a lock on one or more resources to prevent conflicting modifications, with an XML body defining lock details, while the UNLOCK method releases a lock using an opaque lock token in the request header.
WebDAV introduces several new HTTP headers to refine operation scope and conditions. The Depth header controls the extent of operations on collections, accepting values of "0" (header), "1" (this resource and immediate members), or "infinity" (recursive), and is applicable to methods like PROPFIND, PROPPATCH, COPY, MOVE, and MKCOL. The If header enforces preconditions for requests, typically using lock tokens or etags to verify resource state before applying changes, such as in PUT or DELETE operations. The Destination header specifies the target URI for COPY and MOVE methods, ensuring the server performs the relocation or duplication accordingly.
Error handling in WebDAV incorporates new status codes and XML-formatted responses for complex scenarios. The 424 Failed Dependency status indicates that a method failed due to the failure of one or more independent actions, often in batch operations like COPY. The 507 Insufficient Storage status is returned when the server lacks sufficient space to complete the requested action, such as during MKCOL or PUT. For methods involving multiple sub-requests, like PROPFIND on a collection, the 207 Multi-Status response conveys partial successes or failures in an XML document, allowing detailed per-resource reporting without a single overall failure code.
XML structures underpin many WebDAV interactions, particularly in requests and multistatus responses. The <D:propstat> element encapsulates the status of a property or set of properties within a response, containing a <D:prop> subtree for the values and a <D:status> for the HTTP status (e.g., 200 OK or 404 Not Found). For example, a PROPFIND request to retrieve all properties might use the following body:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<D:propfind xmlns:D="DAV:">
 <D:allprop/>
</D:propfind>
The corresponding response under <D:multistatus> would include <D:response> elements for each affected resource, each with a <D:propstat> detailing the properties and their statuses, enabling clients to parse granular results efficiently.

Resource Properties

WebDAV provides a mechanism for associating metadata with resources through properties, enabling clients to store, retrieve, and manage descriptive data separate from the resource's primary content. These properties facilitate distributed authoring by allowing customization and inspection of resource attributes in a structured manner.
Properties are categorized into live and dead types. Live properties are server-enforced, with their values often computed, protected, or derived from the resource state; for example, the DAV:getcontentlength property returns the byte length of the resource's entity body, calculated by the server. In contrast, dead properties are fully client-controlled, lacking server validation of semantics or syntax, and are used for arbitrary metadata such as a custom ns:author element in a user-defined namespace.
Property names follow XML namespace conventions, using the DAV: namespace for standard elements defined in the protocol and arbitrary custom namespaces for extensions. Properties are represented and manipulated via XML structures, such as the <D:propertyupdate> element for batch modifications.
Retrieval of properties occurs via the PROPFIND method, which accepts a Depth header and a request body specifying the desired properties or options: "allprop" to fetch all live and dead properties, "propname" to list names without values, or specific ones via the element. Updates are handled by the PROPPATCH method, which supports partial operations through <D:set> and <D:remove> elements, allowing targeted changes without affecting unspecified properties.
For instance, a client might issue PROPFIND to obtain the DAV:displayname property, yielding a human-readable resource identifier, or use PROPPATCH to set DAV:resourcetype<D:collection/></DAV:resourcetype> on a collection resource. PROPFIND, as a core HTTP extension, supports these operations over standard WebDAV URLs.

Locking Mechanisms

WebDAV provides locking mechanisms to serialize access to resources, preventing conflicts during concurrent modifications by multiple clients. These mechanisms allow a client to obtain a lock on a resource, ensuring that only authorized principals can modify it while the lock is active. Locking in WebDAV is designed to support collaborative authoring environments, where resources might be edited simultaneously by distributed users.
Locks in WebDAV are categorized by scope, which determines the level of access granted to other clients. An exclusive lock prevents any other principal from obtaining a conflicting lock on the same resource or its descendants (depending on depth), effectively serializing write access to the lock owner. In contrast, a shared lock allows multiple principals to acquire compatible shared locks, enabling collaborative read or write operations as long as no exclusive lock is held. Depth handling further refines the lock's reach: a depth of 0 limits the lock to the resource itself, while a depth of infinity extends it to all descendants in the collection hierarchy. This allows fine-grained control over whether locks protect individual files or entire directory structures.
Locking operations are initiated via the LOCK method, which creates a new lock or refreshes an existing one on the specified resource. The request body includes an XML element specifying the lock scope, type (typically write), owner, and timeout, such as <timeout>Second-3600</timeout> to indicate a 3600-second duration. To refresh a lock, a client submits a LOCK request including an If header with the existing lock token. The UNLOCK method removes a lock, requiring the client to provide the lock token in the Lock-Token request header for verification.
Lock semantics revolve around opaque lock tokens, which are unique identifiers returned by the server upon successful lock creation, formatted as URLs using the "opaquelocktoken" scheme (e.g., opaquelocktoken:df9e8e0a-8d6f-11d0-b3b2-00c04fd430c8). These tokens must be included in subsequent requests via the If header to demonstrate ownership and avoid conflicts. Lock discovery is facilitated through the PROPFIND method querying the DAV:lockdiscovery property, which returns an XML response detailing active locks, including their tokens, scopes, depths, and timeouts for the resource and its descendants.
Despite these features, locking in WebDAV is not mandatory in the core specification; servers are permitted to omit support entirely, and when implemented, it often functions as advisory rather than strictly enforced, relying on client compliance to check and honor locks via the If header. This optional nature allows flexibility but can lead to inconsistencies in multi-client scenarios if not all participants adhere to the protocol.

Extensions and Variants

Standard Extensions

Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV) has been extended through several IETF standards-track RFCs that add modular functionality to the core protocol without defining entirely new protocols. These extensions enhance capabilities such as collection management, access control, searching, and resource binding, enabling more sophisticated collaborative authoring scenarios.
One key extension is the WebDAV Ordered Collections Protocol, defined in RFC 3648, which introduces server-side support for maintaining a persistent ordering of members within collections. This allows clients to specify and modify the order of resources in a collection using the ORDERPATCH method, which updates the ordering via an XML body containing position information relative to other members. Servers indicate support for this extension through the "ordered-collections" compliance class in OPTIONS responses, and it builds on the core WebDAV MKCOL and PROPFIND methods to ensure ordered listings are returned consistently.
Access control is addressed by the WebDAV Access Control Protocol in RFC 3744, which defines a framework for managing permissions on resources through access control lists (ACLs). Principals, represented by URIs such as <D:principal> elements, are assigned privileges like "all" (encompassing all operations), "read" (for retrieval), and "write" (for modifications), using the ACL property and methods such as ACL (to set permissions) and PRINCIPAL-PROPERTY-SEARCH (to discover applicable principals). This extension integrates with core WebDAV properties and reports, allowing fine-grained control over who can execute methods like GET, PUT, or DELETE on specific resources.
For searching resources based on properties, WebDAV SEARCH, specified in RFC 5323 (formerly known as DASL), provides a standardized mechanism for property-based queries across collections. Clients use the SEARCH method with an XML query schema, supporting basic and advanced searches (e.g., via the or <D:where> elements) to filter resources by criteria like property values or dates, with results returned in a multistatus response similar to PROPFIND. Although originally drafted as DASL, this RFC achieved proposed standard status with partial adoption in implementations, focusing on simplicity to minimize client complexity while enabling efficient discovery in large repositories.
Binding extensions, outlined in RFC 5842, allow multiple URIs to reference the same underlying resource, addressing scenarios where resources need alternative access paths without duplication. The BIND method creates a new binding by copying the target URI to a new location, while UNBIND removes it, preserving resource properties and locks across bindings; servers report support via the "bindings" compliance class. This also facilitates handling redirects, such as 302 responses for temporary bindings, enhancing flexibility in distributed environments.
The WebDAV Redirect Reference Protocol, defined in RFC 4437, enables resources to serve as references to other resources, functioning like symbolic links. It introduces methods such as MKREDIRECTREF to create reference resources and an extended GET to resolve them, with servers indicating support through the "redirectref" compliance class in OPTIONS responses. This extension supports both permanent and temporary references, integrating with core WebDAV operations to manage aliases without altering the underlying resource.
Versioning extensions, specified in RFC 3253 (known as DeltaV), add support for version-controlled collections and workspaces. It defines methods like CHECKOUT, CHECKIN, and UNCHECKOUT for managing versions, along with REPORT for querying version history and baselines for labeling sets of versions. Servers advertise DeltaV support via specific compliance classes, though the extension's complexity has led to limited adoption compared to core WebDAV features.

Derivative Protocols

Derivative protocols build upon WebDAV's foundational extensions to HTTP, tailoring the protocol for specialized applications such as calendaring, contacts management, and search functionalities. These derivatives leverage WebDAV's resource properties, methods, and locking mechanisms to address domain-specific needs while maintaining compatibility with the core protocol.
CalDAV, defined in RFC 4791 published in 2007, extends WebDAV to support calendar and scheduling operations. It integrates iCalendar (iCal) data into WebDAV resource properties, enabling clients to store, retrieve, and manipulate calendar events, tasks, and free-busy information. Key additions include the REPORT method with calendar-specific query schemas for operations like free-busy lookups and time-range filtering, allowing efficient synchronization of scheduling data across devices. CalDAV has seen widespread adoption, powering services such as Apple iCloud for calendar synchronization and Google Workspace Calendar, which provides a CalDAV interface for third-party clients to access and manage calendar resources.
CardDAV, specified in RFC 6352 from 2011, derives from WebDAV to facilitate the management of contacts and address books using the vCard format. It stores contact information as structured properties on WebDAV resources, supporting operations for creating, updating, and querying address book entries. Notable features include the addressbook-multi-get method for batch retrieval of multiple contacts and query mechanisms to filter by attributes like name or email. This protocol is extensively implemented in major platforms, including Apple iCloud for contacts syncing and Google Contacts, which exposes a CardDAV endpoint for client applications to handle contact data.
Other WebDAV derivatives include efforts in search capabilities, such as DAV Searching and Locating (DASL), an early proposal for querying WebDAV repositories using extensible grammars over HTTP. DASL, outlined in draft specifications, aimed to enable basic and advanced searches but achieved only limited adoption due to incomplete standardization and competition from later mechanisms like WebDAV SEARCH (RFC 5323).

Vendor-Specific Implementations

Microsoft has implemented several proprietary extensions to the WebDAV protocol to enhance integration with Windows file system clients and Microsoft Office applications. The Web Folders feature in Windows allows users to map WebDAV resources as network drives in Explorer, leveraging custom properties stored in IIS to support client-specific behaviors such as property persistence across sessions. These custom properties, often in namespaces like ms:, enable seamless Office document editing by embedding metadata for versioning and collaboration, using PROPPATCH requests tailored for Windows environments to update document-specific attributes without disrupting standard WebDAV compliance. Additionally, the specification introduces client-side headers like FileAttributes and Translate-F to optimize file type handling and reduce unnecessary translations, improving performance for Windows-specific interactions.
Apple's implementation of WebDAV primarily focuses on Finder integration for mounting remote resources as local volumes, but it includes behavioral extensions for macOS file system compatibility. The macOS WebDAV client uses standard HTTP extensions with custom handling for temporary file creation and locking to mimic native file operations, though it generates additional PROPFIND requests for metadata retrieval during mounts. While no explicit custom property namespaces like Microsoft's are documented, Finder's search functionality over WebDAV volumes relies on standard DAV: properties with macOS-specific filtering for attributes such as creation dates and tags, ensuring interoperability while prioritizing user experience in mounted shares.
Other vendors have introduced tailored features to address specific use cases. Apache's mod_dav module supports custom authentication through integration with Apache's core auth providers, such as mod_authz_core for role-based access and mod_auth_basic for credential handling, allowing administrators to extend WebDAV with non-standard security modules without altering the core protocol. In Salesforce B2C Commerce, the WebDAV API enforces upload limits of 500 MB per push to manage resource constraints in cloud environments, alongside authentication tied to merchant credentials for secure file transfers in e-commerce pipelines.
Vendor-specific implementations often lead to interoperability challenges due to reliance on non-standard properties, which can create lock-in effects. For instance, Microsoft's Exchange-defined properties, while functional across some third-party servers, are not part of the core RFC 2518 or 4918 specifications, potentially causing failures in PROPPATCH or PROPFIND operations on compliant but non-Microsoft servers. RFC 4918 errata address related issues, such as simplifying lock-null resource handling to reduce complexity from vendor variations, but non-standard extensions persist as a source of fragmentation in multi-vendor environments.

Implementation and Software

Client Applications

WebDAV client applications enable users to interact with remote resources for file management and collaboration, supporting operations like uploading, downloading, editing, and locking files over HTTP/HTTPS. These tools integrate WebDAV's extensions to HTTP, such as PROPFIND for directory listing and PUT for uploads, allowing seamless access to WebDAV-enabled servers.

Desktop Clients

On Windows, Microsoft Explorer provides native support for WebDAV through its Web Folders feature, which maps remote WebDAV locations as network drives for drag-and-drop file operations and direct editing. Users can connect by entering a WebDAV URL in the address bar or via the "Map Network Drive" option, enabling integration with local file workflows. However, as of 2025, compatibility issues with newer Windows versions may require enabling the WebClient service or using alternative clients for optimal performance.
macOS Finder offers built-in WebDAV connectivity via the "Connect to Server" menu, where users specify a dav:// or davs:// URL to mount the remote folder as a local volume for browsing and modifying files. This allows real-time collaboration on documents stored on WebDAV servers, with support for authentication methods like Basic and Digest.
For Linux distributions, command-line tools like Cadaver provide a text-based interface for WebDAV interactions, supporting commands for listing, uploading, and namespace operations on remote resources. Graphical environments, such as GNOME's Nautilus file manager, leverage GVFS (GNOME Virtual File System) to connect to WebDAV servers using the "Connect to Server" dialog with dav:// protocols, facilitating file management similar to local disks.

Mobile and Cross-Platform Clients

Cross-platform applications like Cyberduck offer robust WebDAV support on macOS and Windows, allowing users to browse, transfer, and synchronize files with servers using HTTP/HTTPS, including mutual TLS authentication for secure connections. It features a user-friendly interface for managing bookmarks and handling large file transfers, making it suitable for both personal and professional use.
Mountain Duck, an extension of Cyberduck, enables mounting WebDAV volumes directly in the file explorer as local drives, supporting file locking when the server complies with WebDAV's LOCK method and providing offline access through caching. This is particularly useful for bridging WebDAV with other protocols like SFTP in hybrid environments.
Transmit, available for macOS, includes WebDAV as one of its core protocols alongside FTP and SFTP, permitting users to connect to servers for uploading, downloading, and editing web content with features like batch processing and synchronization. It emphasizes reliability for web authoring tasks, integrating with Finder for mounted access. Note that while primarily desktop-focused, Transmit's capabilities extend to mobile workflows via macOS iOS integration, with a dedicated iOS app supporting WebDAV.
Dedicated mobile clients include WebDAV Navigator, available for both iOS and Android, which allows users to browse, upload, download, and manage files on WebDAV servers directly from smartphones and tablets, with support for secure connections. On Android, apps like WebDAV Nav Lite and the built-in file manager in Files by Marc Apps (formerly ES File Explorer) provide WebDAV access for similar operations.

Integrated Applications

Microsoft Office applications, such as Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, support direct opening and saving of documents to WebDAV locations, allowing collaborative editing without local downloads by leveraging WebDAV's versioning and locking extensions. This integration is common for enterprise document management, though recent versions may prompt security warnings for non-HTTPS connections.
Adobe Dreamweaver incorporates WebDAV for remote site management, enabling developers to connect to servers, transfer files, and edit web pages directly from the application using its site setup wizard. It handles WebDAV methods for property management and conflict resolution, facilitating team-based web authoring.
As of 2025, WebDAV clients remain prevalent in enterprise settings for accessing platforms like SharePoint and Nextcloud, where they enable synchronized file sharing and integration with productivity suites. Browser extensions, such as the open-source WebDAV browser extension, provide partial support for listing, uploading, and deleting files directly in web browsers like Chrome and Firefox, though they lack full protocol compliance for advanced features like locking.

Server Software

Several open-source web servers provide WebDAV functionality through dedicated modules, enabling the hosting of WebDAV endpoints on standard HTTP infrastructure. The Apache HTTP Server includes the mod_dav module, which implements both Class 1 and Class 2 WebDAV features as defined in RFC 2518, allowing users to perform basic file operations like copying, moving, and locking resources. Similarly, lighttpd offers the mod_webdav module, which supports WebDAV methods such as PROPFIND, PROPPATCH, and MKCOL for lightweight, high-performance file serving in resource-constrained environments. Nginx provides WebDAV support via its ngx_http_dav_module, handling methods like PUT, DELETE, and MKCOL to automate file management over HTTP.
In cloud and content management systems, PHP-based platforms like Nextcloud and ownCloud integrate WebDAV for seamless file access and synchronization, leveraging the Sabre/dav library to handle protocol compliance. Sabre/dav itself serves as a standalone PHP framework for deploying WebDAV servers, supporting extensions like CalDAV for calendar sharing in self-hosted setups. These implementations are particularly suited for collaborative environments, where WebDAV enables remote editing and versioning of files within a web interface.
Commercial offerings include native WebDAV support in Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS), which can be configured on Windows Server to publish WebDAV endpoints with authentication and SSL integration. Microsoft SharePoint Server extends this capability, using WebDAV to allow direct file manipulation in document libraries, often over HTTPS for enterprise collaboration. As of 2025, many WebDAV servers, including those based on Apache, Nginx, and Nextcloud, support HTTP/2 for improved performance in multiplexed connections, while quota management follows RFC 4331 to enforce storage limits per user or collection. These features have made self-hosted WebDAV popular for secure file synchronization in personal and small-team setups, avoiding reliance on proprietary cloud services.

Development Libraries

Development libraries for WebDAV enable developers to integrate WebDAV functionality into custom applications, supporting operations such as resource manipulation, property management, and locking through language-specific APIs. These libraries typically handle HTTP extensions like PROPFIND and MKCOL, while incorporating authentication mechanisms such as Basic and Digest to secure client-server interactions.
In Java, the Apache Slide project provides a WebDAV construction kit (WCK) that offers interfaces and utilities for building both clients and servers, though it is now deprecated in favor of more modern alternatives. Developers can extend Jakarta Commons HttpClientnow evolved into Apache HttpComponents Clientwith WebDAV-specific methods to implement features like directory listing and file uploads, ensuring compatibility with RFC 4918 standards.
For Python, the easywebdav library simplifies client-side WebDAV access by leveraging the Requests HTTP library, supporting operations like uploading, downloading, and directory management with Basic authentication. The pywebdav library, an older implementation, provides a foundational WebDAV client and server framework compliant with levels 1 and 2 of the protocol, though PyWebDAV3 offers an updated Python 3-compatible version. On the server side, wsgidav serves as a generic, extendable WebDAV server based on the WSGI standard, allowing integration into Python web applications with support for Digest authentication and SSL.
In the .NET ecosystem, the WebDAV# library from IT Hit facilitates cross-platform client development for .NET Core, Xamarin, and Windows, enabling asynchronous operations for file handling and property queries while supporting Basic and Digest authentication. WebDav.Client, a third-party asynchronous library, integrates with HttpClient to provide managed access to WebDAV resources across .NET platforms, though full functionality in Windows environments may rely on system-level redirectors.
For JavaScript and Node.js, the webdav-client npm package delivers a promise-based API for browser and server-side WebDAV interactions, including async support for modern applications as of 2025, with built-in handling for authentication schemes like Basic and Digest. This library allows developers to construct custom clients or embed WebDAV capabilities in Node.js servers, focusing on efficient resource operations without requiring additional HTTP abstractions.

Security Considerations

Known Vulnerabilities

WebDAV implementations have historically been susceptible to path traversal vulnerabilities, allowing attackers to access files outside intended directories. For instance, in the Nginx web server version 0.7.61 and earlier, the WebDAV module permitted directory traversal through manipulated MKCOL requests, potentially exposing sensitive files in virtual hosting environments. Similarly, early Apache HTTP Server configurations with mod_dav faced risks from improper handling of resource paths, as seen in exploits targeting directory listings via PROPFIND methods around 2000. More recently, on November 3, 2025, CVE-2025-50735 was disclosed, a directory traversal vulnerability in NextChat versions through 2.16.0, where the WebDAV proxy fails to properly canonicalize or reject dot path segments in its catch-all route, allowing authenticated or anonymous attackers to access arbitrary files.
XML parsing attacks, particularly XML External Entity (XXE) injections, have affected WebDAV servers processing PROPPATCH and PROPFIND requests. In Apache Jackrabbit's WebDAV module (versions prior to 2.4.4), insecure XML parsers allowed attackers to read arbitrary files or perform server-side request forgery by embedding external entities in request bodies, leading to information disclosure. This vulnerability, tracked as CVE-2015-1833, was patched by disabling external entity resolution in the parser. Unpatched Java-based implementations remain at risk due to default lenient XML processing.
A notable recent vulnerability is CVE-2025-33053, a critical remote code execution (RCE) flaw in Microsoft Windows WebDAV, disclosed in June 2025. This zero-day issue stems from external control over file names or paths in Internet Shortcut Files, enabling attackers to execute arbitrary code when users access malicious WebDAV links, often via social engineering. It was actively exploited by the Stealth Falcon APT group (also known as FruityArmor) for malware delivery, targeting high-value individuals. Microsoft addressed it in the June 2025 Patch Tuesday updates, assigning it a CVSS v3.1 score of 8.8. While not directly tied to PROPFIND, exploitation involved crafted WebDAV responses to bypass path validation.
Common security issues in WebDAV include weaknesses in authentication mechanisms and denial-of-service (DoS) vectors. HTTP Digest authentication, often used with WebDAV, can be vulnerable to replay attacks if nonces are not properly rotated or verified, allowing intercepted requests to be resent despite MD5 hashing. Additionally, DoS attacks can occur through infinite-depth PROPFIND requests, which force servers to recursively traverse entire directory trees, consuming excessive memory and CPU; Apache mod_dav mitigates this with the DavDepthInfinity directive. Deep or numerous locks via the LOCK method can also exhaust server resources by preventing access to locked resources indefinitely.
As of November 2025, vulnerabilities in WebDAV are predominantly implementation-specific, with CVEs tied to servers like Apache, Nginx, Microsoft Windows, and other software such as NextChat rather than the protocol itself; reports indicate several such issues disclosed annually, often rated high severity due to their potential for RCE or data exposure.

Best Practices

For secure WebDAV deployment, authentication must be robust to prevent unauthorized access. Administrators should mandate the use of HTTPS with TLS 1.3 to encrypt all communications, as unencrypted HTTP exposes credentials and data to interception. Strong authentication methods, such as Kerberos or NTLM integrated with Windows Authentication, are recommended over weaker options like Basic or Digest authentication, which can be vulnerable to replay attacks even when hashed. Anonymous access must be explicitly disabled through server configurations, such as restricting authentication to role-based access controls (RBAC) that limit permissions to necessary operations only.
Configuration settings play a critical role in mitigating denial-of-service and injection risks. The Depth header in PROPFIND requests should be limited to values between 1 and 10 to prevent resource exhaustion from recursive queries, a common attack vector; for example, Apache's mod_dav module disables infinite depth by default via the DavDepthInfinity directive, which can be further tuned. Lock timeouts enforced by servers should be set to less than one hour to avoid prolonged resource denial, aligning with RFC guidelines that allow servers to impose activity-based expiration policies. All XML inputs in WebDAV methods like PROPFIND and PROPPATCH must undergo strict validation using whitelists for elements and attributes to block injection attacks, following established input sanitization practices.
Effective monitoring helps detect and respond to potential threats in real time. Servers should log all LOCK and UNLOCK operations, including timestamps, user identities, and affected resources, to track concurrency issues and unauthorized attempts. Patterns indicative of exploits, such as anomalous PROPFIND requests associated with CVE-2025-33053, must be monitored through log analysis for unusual depth or malformed XML. Deploying a Web Application Firewall (WAF) to filter unauthorized WebDAV methods like PUT or DELETE further enhances protection by blocking suspicious traffic.
As of 2025, integrating OAuth 2.0 with WebDAV provides a modern, token-based authentication alternative suitable for federated environments, as demonstrated in implementations like Salesforce B2C Commerce that combine it with RBAC for API clients. Regular patching of underlying server libraries, such as Apache's mod_dav, is essential to address newly disclosed vulnerabilities; for instance, timely updates mitigate risks like remote code execution flaws in WebDAV components.

Alternatives

Comparable Protocols

File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and its secure variant, Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), represent traditional approaches to file transfer that predate WebDAV and share some basic functionalities like uploading, downloading, and directory navigation. FTP, defined in RFC 959, operates over TCP/IP for straightforward file exchanges but transmits data and credentials in plaintext, necessitating extensions like FTPS for encryption. SFTP, built on SSH as outlined in RFC 4251 and the file transfer draft, provides secure, encrypted transfers with authentication, making it suitable for remote file management over untrusted networks. However, both lack WebDAV's native HTTP/HTTPS integration, which enables seamless web browser access, and do not support advanced collaboration features such as versioning or property management, limiting them to basic transfer operations.
Server Message Block (SMB), also known as Common Internet File System (CIFS) in its original form, is a network file-sharing protocol developed by Microsoft for sharing files, printers, and other resources across Windows systems. Current versions like SMB 3.0 and later include features such as opportunistic locking for concurrent access, encryption, and multichannel support, facilitating collaborative editing in enterprise environments. While SMB supports file locking similar to WebDAV, it is designed primarily for local area networks (LANs) with direct connections, performing less efficiently over wide area networks (WANs) due to its stateful nature and higher latency sensitivity, and it requires dedicated clients rather than web-native integration.
Representational State Transfer (REST) APIs offer a modern, HTTP-based alternative for file and object management, exemplified by the Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) API, which uses standard HTTP methods (GET, PUT, POST, DELETE) for scalable cloud storage operations. These APIs are stateless, allowing horizontal scaling and integration with web services without maintaining session state, and support metadata handling and access controls akin to WebDAV's properties. However, REST APIs typically demand custom client code or SDKs for interaction, lacking WebDAV's transparency for mounting as network drives in operating systems like Windows or macOS, which enables drag-and-drop usage without specialized software.
Other protocols, such as WebSockets, enable real-time collaboration in applications like Etherpad, where multiple users edit shared documents simultaneously through bidirectional, low-latency communication channels. WebSockets, standardized in RFC 6455, maintain persistent connections over HTTP for live updates, supporting features like operational transformation for conflict resolution in collaborative text editing. Unlike WebDAV's focus on structured file operations and versioning, WebSockets prioritize streaming data for interactive sessions but are not optimized for bulk file transfers or hierarchical directory management.

Limitations of WebDAV

WebDAV's reliance on verbose XML payloads for methods, headers, and property manipulations introduces substantial overhead, particularly noticeable in operations involving numerous small files or frequent metadata exchanges, where parsing and transmission costs can degrade throughput compared to more streamlined binary protocols. This XML-centric design, inherited from its HTTP/1.1 foundations, lacks built-in mechanisms for efficient large-scale transfers, such as native multipart uploads or resumable sessions found in contemporary RESTful APIs, resulting in slower performance for bulk data scenarios without additional server-side optimizations.
Security in WebDAV is inherently tied to HTTP authentication schemes like Basic and Digest, which transmit credentials in ways vulnerable to eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks when not protected by TLS; for instance, Basic authentication sends usernames and passwords in base64-encoded cleartext, offering no real protection absent encryption. Furthermore, while WebDAV defines locking to prevent concurrent modifications, this feature is optional and not universally enforced across implementations, potentially leading to race conditions where simultaneous edits by multiple clients overwrite changes without notification.
Adoption of WebDAV faces barriers from inconsistent interoperability between client and server vendors, as varying levels of compliance with the protocol's extensionssuch as partial support for properties or searchoften result in compatibility failures during cross-platform use. Mobile device support remains limited, with built-in clients on platforms like iOS and Android exhibiting reliability issues, including restrictions on non-HTTPS connections for security reasons and challenges in handling locks or large files seamlessly.
As of 2025, WebDAV persists mainly in legacy enterprise systems for document collaboration but is declining for new developments, overshadowed by scalable cloud-native APIs from services like Google Drive that offer better integration, resumable uploads, and reduced complexity; moreover, many WebDAV implementations lag in compatibility with HTTP/3's QUIC transport, hindering adoption in high-performance, modern web environments.

References

RFC 4918 - HTTP Extensions for Web Distributed Authoring and ...

IETF WEBDAV Working Group Home Page

WebDAV and DeltaV: The Writeable, Collaborative, Versionable Web

WWW Distributed Authoring and Versioning (webdav)

None

RFC 3648 - Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV ...

RFC 4437 - Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV ...

Using the WebDAV Redirector - Microsoft Learn

What Is WebDAV? - Version Control with Subversion

DAV Frequently Asked Questions - WebDAV Resources

RFC 2518 - HTTP Extensions for Distributed Authoring -- WEBDAV

Connect to or disconnect from a WebDAV server on Mac

WWW Distributed Authoring and Versioning (webdav) Charter - IETF

2.1.14 WWW Distributed Authoring and Versioning (webdav) - IETF

mod_dav Turning the Web into a Writable Medium

History for draft-ietf-webdav-requirements -02

 An evaluation of the WebDAV extensions to the HTTP protocol

WebDAV and the Troubled "Microsoft Way" of Implementation

 WebDAV: A network protocol for remote collaborative authoring

RFC 4918: HTTP Extensions for Web Distributed Authoring and ...

RFC 5789 - PATCH Method for HTTP - IETF Datatracker

WWW Distributed Authoring and Versioning (webdav)

RFC 2518: HTTP Extensions for Distributed Authoring -- WEBDAV

RFC 2616 - Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1 - IETF Datatracker

RFC 5397: WebDAV Current Principal Extension

The Use of Dublin Core Metadata in WebDAV

RFC 3744 - Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV ...

RFC 4791 - Calendaring Extensions to WebDAV (CalDAV)

Calendar declarative configuration for Apple devices

CalDAV API Developer's Guide | Google Calendar

RFC 6352 - CardDAV: vCard Extensions to Web Distributed ...

Contacts declarative configuration for Apple devices - Apple Support

Manage contacts with the CardDAV protocol | People API

DAV Searching and Locating (DASL) Home Page

How to Use Custom Properties With WebDAV | Microsoft Learn

Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV) Protocol ...

File System Details - Apple Developer

Turn Apache into a collaborative authoring platform with mod_dav

WebDAV Upload Limit Is Increased - Salesforce Help

 The WebDAV Property Design - UC Santa Cruz

rfc4918 - RFC Editor

Accessing Nextcloud files using WebDAV

Inquiry about the Deprecation of WebClient/WebDAV Services ...

WebDAV - ArchWiki

18.7 Using Cadaver as a WebDAV Client - Oracle Help Center

WebDAV Cyberduck Help documentation

Mountain Duck

File Locking Cyberduck Help documentation - Mountain Duck

Transmit 5 - Panic

Connect to a publishing server - Adobe Help Center

Making Microsoft Office to Work with WebDAV Server

Configure WebDAV in IIS for use with Dreamweaver

WebDAVDevs/webdav-browser-extension - GitHub

Microsoft 365 SharePoint online access through WebDav on ...

mod_dav - Apache HTTP Server Version 2.4

Mod webdav - lighty labs - Lighttpd

Module ngx_http_dav_module - nginx

Accessing ownCloud Files Using WebDAV

ownCloud and sabre/dav

Installing and Configuring WebDAV on IIS 7 and Later

Sharepoint WebDAV over HTTPS - Microsoft Q&A

RFC 4331 - Quota and Size Properties for Distributed Authoring and ...

WebDAV Isn't Dead Yet - Makefile.feld

Jakarta Slide - WebDAV Construction Kit

Which Java-library can be used to access data via WebDAV?

Package org.apache.jackrabbit.webdav.client.methods

11.17. Connecting to WebDAV Resources - Jakarta Commons ...

easywebdav - PyPI

amnong/easywebdav: A WebDAV Client in Python - GitHub

PyWebDAV - Google Code

PyWebDAV3 - PyPI

mar10/wsgidav: A generic and extendable WebDAV server ... - GitHub

WsgiDAV 4.3.4a1 documentation

WebDAV Client Library for .NET, Xamarin iOS & Android

WebDav.Client 2.9.0 - NuGet

webdav-client - NPM

WebDAV client written in Typescript for NodeJS and the browser

Nginx 0.7.61 - WebDAV Directory Traversal - Exploit-DB

Apache 1.3.12 - WebDAV Directory Listings - Linux remote Exploit

Jackrabbit WebDAV bundle susceptible to XXE/XEE attack (CVE ...

CVE-2015-1833 (Jackrabbit WebDAV XXE vulnerability)

Apache JackRabbit - WebDAV XML External Entity - Exploit-DB

CVE-2025-33053 Detail - NVD

CVE-2025-33053 Detection: A Critical WebDAV Zero-Day RCE ...

CVE-2025-33053: RCE in WebDAV | Kaspersky official blog

June 2025 Patch Tuesday: Updates and Analysis | CrowdStrike

Basic and Digest Access Authentication - WebDAV Resources

mod_dav - Apache HTTP Server Version 2.5

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4918#section-17.2

Webdav : Products and vulnerabilities, CVEs

Windows WebDAV Tips and Tricks | ServerWatch

Securing Your Windows WebDAV Server: Best Practices for ...

WebDAV detection - Beagle Security

Input Validation - OWASP Cheat Sheet Series

CVE-2025-33053 Impact, Exploitability, and Mitigation Steps - Wiz

WebDAV Authentication and Authorization in B2C Commerce

Micropatches Released for WEBDAV Remote Code Execution ...

WebDAV vs. FTP: Comprehensive Comparison of Secure File Transfer Protocols | South River Technologies

Microsoft SMB Protocol and CIFS Protocol Overview - Win32 apps

Overview of file sharing using the SMB 3 protocol in Windows Server

Why did Microsoft choose a RESTful API over WebDAV for BLOB ...

Etherpad

Etherpad: A modern really-real-time collaborative document editor.

 Oracle XML DB Developer's Guide

A Theoretical Study on the Performance Characteristics of ... - IJFMR

RFC 2617: HTTP Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication

Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV) Locking ...

Unofficial WebDAV support team - GitHub

WebDAV support in IOS - Stack Overflow

What Is WebDAV? Easy 2025 Guide to the Protocol - Cloudwards.net

HTTP/3 is everywhere but nowhere
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion