Windows Update Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 18 days ago 
Windows Update
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 Windows Update is a built-in service in Microsoft Windows operating systems, such as Windows 11 and Windows Server, that automatically downloads and installs updates to keep devices secure, reliable, and equipped with the latest features. It delivers a range of update types, such as monthly quality updates that address security vulnerabilities and improve stability, and annual feature updates that introduce new capabilities and enhancements. Through the Unified Update Platform (UUP), Windows Update manages the scanning, downloading, and installation of these payloads, including operating system fixes, device drivers, and Microsoft Defender antivirus definitions, although administrators can exclude drivers from inclusion in quality updates by enabling the Group Policy setting "Do not include drivers with Windows Updates" or by configuring the equivalent registry value ExcludeWUDriversInQualityUpdate to 1 (detailed in the Policy Configuration and Deployment Tools section).
The service operates via the Windows Update Client, which integrates with the operating system's settings to check for available updates over the internet, prioritizing downloads based on factors like file size and connection speed while requiring the device to be powered and connected. Users can manually initiate checks through the Settings > Windows Update interface, view installation history, pause updates for up to 35 days, or schedule restarts to minimize disruption during active hours. Users can also limit background data usage on Wi-Fi networks, including restricting automatic update downloads and other background activities, by setting a connection as metered. Detailed instructions for doing so are provided in the Automatic Updates and Scheduling section. However, Windows 11 does not officially support permanently and completely disabling automatic updates, as they are essential for security, stability, and features. Disabling may lead to vulnerabilities, compatibility issues, and Microsoft may force certain partial updates. It is strongly recommended to keep updates enabled for system safety.
For enterprise environments, tools like Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) extend Windows Update's capabilities to manage deployments across networks. Overall, Windows Update plays a critical role in maintaining system integrity by ensuring timely delivery of patches that mitigate risks from evolving threats and software issues.

History and Development

Origins in Early Windows Versions

Windows Update was first introduced as a web-based service alongside the release of Windows 98 on June 25, 1998, integrated with Internet Explorer 4.0 to enable users to manually scan for and download drivers, patches, and other updates directly from Microsoft's servers. This marked the initial shift from floppy disk or CD-based updates to an online delivery model, primarily targeting individual consumers and small businesses seeking to maintain system stability and compatibility. Early adoption was limited by the era's dial-up internet speeds and lack of automation, but it laid the groundwork for centralized update management in consumer Windows versions.
The service expanded with the launch of Windows 2000 in February 2000, incorporating the Critical Update Notification (CUN) utility, a downloadable tool that periodically checked for security vulnerabilities and alerted users via email or desktop icons to download critical patches from the Windows Update site. CUN addressed growing concerns over security threats in enterprise environments, allowing IT administrators to receive notifications without full system scans, though installation remained manual. This version of the utility, available for Windows 98 and 2000, represented an early step toward proactive security maintenance but was eventually superseded by more integrated features.
A significant advancement came with Windows XP, released on October 25, 2001, which integrated Automatic Updates as an optional feature for the first time, permitting users to configure automated downloading and installation of security and critical updates during off-peak hours. This reduced user intervention and improved patch compliance, with settings accessible via the Control Panel to balance convenience and control. Key milestones highlighted the service's maturing role: its first widespread deployment occurred in response to the January 2003 SQL Slammer worm, where Microsoft directed millions of users to the Windows Update site for the pre-existing patch (MS02-039), underscoring the need for timely updates amid global network disruptions. By early 2005, the service had scaled dramatically, serving approximately 150 million users monthly, reflecting rapid PC proliferation and increasing internet access.
Support for these early implementations followed Microsoft's lifecycle policy, with Windows 98 and Millennium Edition reaching end-of-support on July 11, 2006, after which no further security updates or technical assistance were provided. Windows XP's mainstream support ended in 2009, with extended support concluding on April 8, 2014; however, paid Extended Security Updates were offered to enterprise customers until July 14, 2019, allowing limited protection beyond the standard lifecycle. These timelines prompted migrations to newer versions like Windows Vista, which introduced further automation in update delivery.

Evolution Through Windows Vista to Windows 11

Windows Vista, released in 2007, introduced the Windows Update Agent (WUAU) as a core component for local update detection and installation, enabling users to manage updates directly through an integrated Control Panel applet rather than relying solely on web-based access from earlier versions like Windows XP. This shift improved reliability and reduced dependency on internet connectivity for initial scans, with the agent using APIs to interact with Microsoft's update services. By 2008, Windows Update had expanded to serve over 500 million client devices worldwide, reflecting the growing adoption of automated patching across the Windows ecosystem.
In Windows 7, launched in 2009, enhancements focused on optimizing update delivery to minimize bandwidth consumption, including improved background transfer mechanisms that allowed for more efficient downloading and sharing of update files within local networks. These changes built on Vista's foundation by incorporating better scheduling and reduced network overhead, preparing the groundwork for later peer-to-peer features.
Windows 8 and 8.1, released in 2012 and 2013 respectively, integrated Windows Update more deeply with the Metro-style interface and the Windows Store, bundling app updates from the Store alongside traditional OS patches to streamline maintenance for the new app ecosystem. This unification allowed automatic downloading and installation of Metro app updates without separate user intervention, enhancing consistency across desktop and touch experiences.
The release of Windows 10 in 2015 represented a paradigm shift to the "Windows as a Service" model, where updates transitioned to a continuous delivery approach featuring semi-annual feature updates that introduced new capabilities, monthly quality updates for security and reliability fixes, and cumulative servicing stacks that incorporated all prior changes into single packages. This model emphasized regular, predictable servicing to keep devices current, with feature updates typically released in the spring and fall, while quality updates arrived on the second Tuesday of each month.
Windows 11, introduced in 2021, further refined the user interface by relocating Windows Update to the Settings app, providing a modern, streamlined view for checking, downloading, and viewing update history. Integration with Microsoft Accounts enabled cloud-based update history accessible across devices, allowing users to track installations via OneDrive-backed backups. The 2024 Update (version 24H2) brought additional optimizations tailored for Copilot+ PCs, leveraging AI hardware like neural processing units to accelerate update processes, reduce installation times, and improve overall efficiency on AI-enabled devices. By the 2020s, Windows Update was serving over 1.4 billion active Windows devices.
A notable policy evolution occurred with the deprecation of SHA-1 signing in 2020, prompting Microsoft to transition Windows 7 extended security updates (ESU) to SHA-2 signed patches, which continued until the program's end in 2023 to address cryptographic vulnerabilities while supporting legacy systems. This change ensured compatibility with modern update delivery while phasing out insecure algorithms.

Recent Advancements in Windows 11 and Server 2025

The Windows 11 2025 Update, designated as version 25H2, was released to the general public starting in late September 2025, with availability through Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) beginning on October 14, 2025. This annual feature update builds on the cumulative update model established in prior versions by emphasizing seamless security patching, particularly through expanded hotpatching capabilities that allow organizations to apply monthly security updates without requiring device restarts. Hotpatching in 25H2 supports Enterprise and Education editions, delivering smaller, targeted updates to the kernel and system components, which reduces the frequency of full baseline cumulative updates to quarterly intervals.
Hotpatch technology, which enables in-place updates to running processes without interrupting system operation, was first made broadly available in Windows 11 version 24H2 for select enterprise editions in 2024. In the 25H2 release, this feature has been enhanced and extended, allowing for more comprehensive security fixes while minimizing reboots and associated downtime for critical workloads. Devices enrolled in hotpatching receive these updates automatically via Windows Update, with a required restart only for the quarterly baseline to maintain compatibility and stability.
For Windows Server 2025, integrations with Windows Update introduce Server Flighting, a mechanism that enables seamless, opt-in upgrades through the Windows Insider Program settings in Windows Update, allowing administrators to test and deploy previews without disrupting production environments. Additionally, hybrid cloud syncing is facilitated through Azure Arc and Azure Hybrid Benefit, which provide pay-as-you-go licensing for on-premises servers managed via Azure, streamlining update distribution and compliance across hybrid setups. These features support unified update management, where servers can pull updates from Azure services to ensure consistent patching in mixed on-premises and cloud infrastructures.
Delivery Optimization has been refined for better performance on Windows 11 version 25H2.
On the security front, enterprise update management in 2025 incorporates mandatory Microsoft Entra multifactor authentication (MFA) for administrative access to services like Azure CLI and PowerShell, which are often used in conjunction with Windows Update deployments, effective from October 1, 2025. This policy aims to secure update orchestration in enterprise environments by replacing legacy authentication methods. Meanwhile, support for Windows 10 concludes on October 14, 2025, with extended security updates (ESU) available through paid enrollment for businesses and free enrollment for consumers (up to 10 devices per Microsoft account) for an additional year until October 13, 2026, including options for LTSC variants like Windows 10 IoT Enterprise LTSC 2021, which receive updates via specialized channels.
Hotpatching has demonstrated significant impact on operational efficiency, with Microsoft reporting that enrolled devices achieve up to 90% compliance within 5 days of monthly Patch Tuesday releases, substantially lowering update-related interruptions compared to traditional methods.

Core Components and Functionality

Types of Updates Provided

Windows Update delivers a variety of update categories designed to maintain system security, stability, and functionality across Windows client versions, including Windows 10 and 11. These updates are broadly classified into feature updates, quality updates (encompassing security and non-security fixes), driver and firmware updates, servicing stack updates, and other specialized categories like Microsoft product updates and Defender definitions. Each type serves a distinct purpose, with releases aligned to a structured lifecycle to balance timely delivery and manageability.
Security updates address specific vulnerabilities in Windows components, rated as critical, important, moderate, or low severity, and are essential for mitigating exploits such as zero-day threats. They are released monthly on Patch Tuesdaythe second Tuesday of each month at 10:00 AM PST/PDTas part of cumulative quality updates, with out-of-band releases issued as needed for urgent issues. These updates focus solely on security-related fixes and are applicable to all supported architectures, including x86, x64, and ARM64.
Quality updates encompass both security fixes and non-security improvements, such as bug resolutions, performance enhancements, and reliability patches, without introducing new features. Since Windows 10, these are delivered in a cumulative format, where each monthly release bundles all previous security, non-security, and servicing stack changes, reducing the need for multiple installations. Monthly quality updates, including the Monthly Rollup (a comprehensive cumulative set classified as "Important") and Security-Only Updates (focused on vulnerabilities), are released on Patch Tuesday, while Preview of Monthly Rollup versions provide early testing opportunities on the fourth Tuesday.
Feature updates represent major version upgrades that introduce new capabilities, user interface changes, and enhancements, such as Windows 11 versions 24H2 and 25H2. They are released annually in the second half of the calendar year, with a 24-month support period for Home and Pro editions or 36 months for Enterprise and Education, and are deferrable up to 365 days in enterprise environments. These updates typically range from 2-4 GB in download size due to their comprehensive nature and are architecture-specific, supporting x86, x64, and ARM64 variants.
Driver and firmware updates target hardware-specific components, ensuring compatibility, performance, and security for devices like graphics cards, network adapters, and BIOS/UEFI systems. They are offered as optional updates through Windows Update, often integrated with OEM partnerships for validated deliveries, and can be released on a variable schedule outside the monthly cadence. The inclusion of drivers with monthly quality updates can be prevented using the "Do not include drivers with Windows Updates" policy or the equivalent registry setting (detailed in Policy Configuration and Deployment Tools). A driver update is defined as software that controls input/output for hardware devices, distinct from OS-level changes.
Servicing stack updates (SSUs) update the underlying components responsible for installing other Windows updates, including the Component-Based Servicing (CBS) stack, to ensure compatibility and reliable application of fixes. These are included in some quality updates or released out-of-band when necessary, and must be installed prior to other updates for proper functionality.
Other categories include Microsoft product updates for non-OS software like the Microsoft Edge browser or Office applications, which require opt-in via Microsoft Update and focus on product-specific enhancements. Definition updates for Windows Defender provide frequent additions to threat detection databases, such as virus signatures and phishing protections, often delivered multiple times daily. Additional legacy terms like hotfixes (targeted issue resolutions), update rollups (cumulative non-security sets), feature packs (interim functionality additions), and critical updates (non-security bug fixes) have been consolidated into the modern quality update framework since Windows 10.
The overall update lifecycle emphasizes a predictable rhythm: annual feature releases for innovation, monthly quality updates for maintenance, and ad-hoc out-of-band interventions for emergencies, with all updates applicable based on the device's edition, architecture, and channel (e.g., consumer vs. enterprise). This structure supported a 10-year lifecycle for Windows 10, which ended on October 14, 2025, with Extended Security Updates (ESU) available thereafter, and provides similar extended support for Windows 11; for consumer editions of Windows 10, free security updates are available until October 13, 2026, for up to 10 devices enrolled with a Microsoft account, ensuring ongoing applicability across diverse hardware configurations.

Update Detection and Installation Process

The update detection and installation process in Windows Update begins with the scanning phase, where the client device periodically queries Microsoft Update servers (or a configured WSUS server) using the Windows Update API to identify applicable updates. This scan evaluates the device's operating system version, hardware configuration, and installed software to determine relevance, employing either full online scans or delta scans that check only changes since the last evaluation. The process adheres to publisher guidelines for update applicability, ensuring only compatible updates, such as security patches, are selected.
Once applicable updates are identified, the download phase commences, utilizing the Background Intelligent Transfer Service (BITS) to manage throttled, low-impact transfers that minimize disruption to network usage. BITS enables resumable downloads and integrates with Delivery Optimization for peer-to-peer sharing of update files among local devices, reducing reliance on direct server connections and conserving bandwidth. Downloaded files are temporarily stored before being staged to a local cache, with the system respecting user-configured metered connection settings to limit background data usageincluding automatic update downloads, app downloads, and other background activitieson metered networks and avoid excessive data consumption.
The installation phase follows a structured sequence to ensure reliability, starting with pre-download verification to confirm file integrity and applicability. Updates are then staged to the local cache, applied by the servicing stack (such as the Component Based Servicing engine), and committed with built-in rollback capabilities to revert changes if issues arise during application. For updates requiring kernel-level modifications, the process prompts for a device reboot, which can be scheduled or managed to minimize user interruption. For updates that require a restart, configuration continues after the reboot. If the configuration fails during this post-reboot phase, Windows displays the message "Failure configuring Windows updates. Reverting changes. Do not turn off your computer." and automatically initiates rollback to restore the system to its previous state. Such failures are logged as Event ID 20 (source: Microsoft-Windows-WindowsUpdateClient) in Event Viewer under Applications and Services Logs > Microsoft > Windows > WindowsUpdateClient > Operational, typically with a description indicating "Installation Failure" and an error code (e.g., 0x80070005).
Error handling is integrated throughout to maintain process integrity, with comprehensive logging in the update history to record successes, failures, and details like error codesfor instance, 0x80070002 indicating a missing file during installation. If a recent update causes compatibility problems with applications, users can check the update history to identify the specific update correlating with the issue onset and consider rolling back or uninstalling it to resolve the problem. Built-in troubleshooter tools analyze logs and common failure points, such as network issues detected via the Service Locator Service, to diagnose and resolve problems like protocol errors or SOAP faults. For advanced troubleshooting, users can manually reset Windows Update components via Command Prompt as an administrator, such as stopping services (wuauserv, cryptSvc, bits, msiserver), renaming folders like SoftwareDistribution and catroot2, and restarting the services. It is not safe to clear the Windows Update cache (e.g., contents of the SoftwareDistribution folder) during an active Windows update download or installation process, as this risks interrupting the process, causing update failures, file corruption, or requiring re-downloads. Standard troubleshooting requires stopping the Windows Update service (and related services) first and ensuring no updates are actively running or pending installation before clearing the cache; see the Command-Line Update Tools section for details.
Bandwidth management and privacy considerations are configurable to balance update delivery with user control; for example, metered connection settings restrict background data usage on metered networks, preventing automatic downloads of updates, app downloads, and other background activities on data-limited networks, while options allow opting out of telemetry data collection related to update scans and installations.
Conceptually, the overall process follows a client-server interaction model: the device initiates secure HTTPS queries to Microsoft servers for metadata and payloads, with fallback mechanisms for proxy handling and error recovery ensuring resilient operation without constant connectivity.
Windows Update connectivity relies on HTTP/HTTPS protocols (ports 80 and 443) rather than ICMP. The domain update.microsoft.com does not respond to ICMP ping requests, as Microsoft disables echo replies on many of its servers, including those for Windows Update, for security reasons. Additionally, the domain resolves to dynamic IP addresses that change frequently due to load balancing and other infrastructure practices. This explains common troubleshooting observations where ping tests fail, even when the service is operational; connectivity should be verified using HTTP/HTTPS requests instead.

Windows Update Agent and Delivery Optimization

The Windows Update Agent (WUA) is the core software component responsible for managing the update process in Windows operating systems, introduced as a set of Component Object Model (COM) interfaces with Windows Vista to enable programmatic access to Windows Update and Windows Server Update Services (WSUS). It operates as a background service, utilizing the executable wuauclt.exe to handle key functions such as scanning for available updates, downloading selected content, and reporting installation status and history. General status and history can be viewed in the Event Viewer under Windows Logs > System by filtering for the WindowsUpdateClient source, while detailed installation failure information, such as Event ID 20, is available in the Operational log under Applications and Services Logs > Microsoft > Windows > WindowsUpdateClient. The agent's versions evolve alongside the operating system; for instance, in Windows 11, the core wuaueng.dll file typically reflects versions in the 10.0.x format, corresponding to the OS build (e.g., 10.0.22621.x for version 22H2).
Delivery Optimization, implemented via the DoSvc service since Windows 10, enhances the WUA by incorporating peer-to-peer (P2P) sharing to distribute update payloads more efficiently, allowing devices to source content from local network peers or a Microsoft content delivery network (CDN) in addition to direct HTTP downloads from Microsoft servers. This approach reduces overall internet bandwidth usage for updates; for example, Microsoft internal deployments have reported up to 76% of content sourced from peers rather than the internet through optimized group policies with 24-hour local caching. Configurable modes include HTTP-only downloads (bypassing P2P), local area network (LAN) peer sharing (default for NAT environments), or broader internet-based peering, all managed via Group Policy or mobile device management (MDM) tools to balance performance and network constraints.
The WUA itself receives updates through servicing stack updates (SSUs), which are cumulative patches designed to enhance the reliability of the entire update servicing process, including fixes for the agent to prevent installation failures during monthly quality updates. In enterprise environments, the agent integrates with WSUS for centralized caching and approval workflows, enabling administrators to stage updates across networks without redundant downloads from Microsoft servers.
Technically, the WUA processes update catalogs using XML-based metadata to evaluate applicability rules, detect prerequisites, and validate content integrity before installation. It supports modern networking standards, including full compatibility with IPv6 for connectivity to update servers and the ability to route through HTTP proxy servers configured via system settings or policies. Connectivity to Windows Update servers relies on HTTP (port 80) and HTTPS (port 443) protocols, with no reliance on ICMP; update.microsoft.com does not respond to ICMP ping requests, as Microsoft disables echo replies on many of its servers for security reasons, and the domain resolves to dynamic IP addresses that change frequently.
Certain limitations apply based on Windows edition; for example, Windows Home editions lack advanced enterprise options such as direct WSUS integration or granular Delivery Optimization policies available in Pro, Enterprise, and Education versions, relying instead on default consumer behaviors for update handling.

Client Interfaces and User Tools

Windows Update Application and Web App

The legacy web-based interface for Windows Update, accessible via windowsupdate.microsoft.com, was introduced with Windows 98 in 1998 as the primary method for users to manually scan for, select, and download updates directly through a browser, primarily optimized for Internet Explorer. This browser-dependent approach required users to actively visit the site and choose individual updates, such as security patches and drivers, without integrated automation on the operating system level. The service remained the main client component for over a decade, supporting early Windows versions like 98, Me, 2000, and XP, until the transition to standalone system-integrated tools around 2009 with Windows 7.
In contrast, the modern Windows Update interface is embedded within the Settings application in Windows 10 and 11, accessible via Start > Settings > Windows Update, providing a centralized hub for checking, downloading, and managing updates without requiring a web browser. Key features include viewing detailed update history, which lists installed items with options to uninstall if neededfor instance, if a recent update causes compatibility problems with apps, users can check the update history to identify the problematic update and consider uninstalling or rolling back that specific update if it correlates with the issue's onset; pausing updates for up to 35 days to avoid disruptions; and advanced options for delivery optimization and restart scheduling. The Windows Update interface also provides access to the built-in Windows Update Troubleshooter, a diagnostic tool that identifies and resolves common issues related to update detection, downloading, and installation. To run the troubleshooter, select Start > Settings > System > Troubleshoot > Other troubleshooters. Under Most frequent, select Windows Update > Run.
In managed environments, when the Group Policy setting "Specify intranet Microsoft update service location" (under Computer Configuration > Administrative Templates > Windows Components > Windows Update) is enabled, the Windows Update page in Settings displays the message "Some settings are managed by your organization." This message indicates that update detection and related settings are centrally managed by organizational policies, often redirecting to an internal server such as Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) instead of Microsoft's public update sources.
This shift from fully manual web interactions to an OS-native app has facilitated greater automation, reducing the need for user intervention in routine maintenance.
Windows 11 includes updates to dialog pop-ups in the Windows Update interface with a more modern design, as part of broader enhancements rolled out in October 2025.
Accessibility is prioritized in the modern interface, with full support for Narrator screen reader compatibility to read update descriptions and status aloud, as well as high-contrast themes enabled through Settings > Accessibility > Contrast themes to improve visibility for low-vision users.
Over time, these interfaces reflect a broader transition from entirely manual processes in the early web erawhere users handled 100% of selectionsto predominantly automated delivery in contemporary versions, enhancing security and convenience for the majority of users.

Automatic Updates and Scheduling

Automatic Updates in Windows XP introduced configurable options to manage update delivery without full user intervention, allowing users to choose between notifying before downloading updates, automatically downloading and notifying for installation, or fully automating downloads and scheduled installations. These settings were accessible via the System Properties control panel under the Automatic Updates tab, with the recommended option enabling downloads and installations at a user-specified day and time to minimize disruption.
In Windows 10 and 11, enhancements expanded automation controls, including Active Hours, which prevent restarts during user-defined periods of peak activity, with a maximum configurable window of up to 18 hours based on detected usage patterns. Users can also pause updates for up to 35 days, with the option repeatable to extend the pause period. Additionally, setting a Wi-Fi network connection as metered in Windows 10 and Windows 11 limits background data usage, restricting automatic updates, app downloads, and other background activities. Additionally, deadline enforcement policies ensure timely installation of feature updates after an initial deferral period, typically allowing up to 365 days for feature updates and 30 days for quality updates before automatic application to maintain compliance. These features aim to balance security needs with user convenience by scheduling operations outside active periods.
By default, Automatic Updates are enabled on Windows Pro and Enterprise editions, where monthly quality updates install automatically upon availability to address security vulnerabilities, while feature updates require user approval or policy-defined deferrals to avoid immediate deployment. This behavior ensures consistent patching for critical fixes without overriding broader system changes, though Home editions follow similar automation with fewer deferral options.
Configuration of Automatic Updates occurs primarily through Group Policy for enterprise environments, enabling deferrals for feature and quality updates to align with organizational testing cycles, or via registry keys such as the AUOptions DWORD under HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE(/page/Microsoft)\Windows\CurrentVersion\WindowsUpdate\Auto Update, which supports values from 2 (notify before download) to 5 (auto download and scheduled install). These settings allow fine-tuned control, with AUOptions levels extending in policy-managed scenarios to include additional behaviors like immediate installation after download.
Microsoft does not provide an official way to permanently disable automatic updates in Windows 10 and Windows 11, as they are essential for security and stability; most workarounds are temporary, reversible, or can be overridden by future updates or system processes. Disabling updates is not recommended, as it leaves the system vulnerable to security threats, exploits, and malware. However, several consumer-level methods allow temporary pausing or limiting of updates, though none prevent all updates permanently (particularly security updates), as Microsoft may enforce certain updates through various mechanisms.
These methods include:

Pausing updates (up to 35 days, repeatable): Go to Settings > Windows Update > Pause updates and select a duration (maximum 35 days). This can be repeated after expiration to extend the pause.

Setting active hours and notifications: In Settings > Windows Update > Advanced options, configure active hours to avoid restarts during specified periods and enable "Show a notification when your PC requires a restart to finish updating" or similar options.

Setting metered connection: To limit background data usage on a Wi-Fi network in Windows 10 and Windows 11, set the connection as metered. Open Settings (Windows key + I). Go to Network & internet > Wi-Fi > Manage known networks. Select your Wi-Fi network and click Properties. Turn on "Set as metered connection". This restricts automatic updates, app downloads, and other background activities. To allow full background usage, turn it off.

Group Policy configuration (Pro/Enterprise editions, most effective official method): Run gpedit.msc, go to Computer Configuration > Administrative Templates > Windows Components > Windows Update > Manage end user experience > Configure Automatic Updates, and set to "Disabled" or "2 - Notify for download and notify for install". Additionally, configure deferral policies to delay feature updates for up to 365 days and quality updates for up to 30 days. Additionally, configure "Do not connect to any Windows Update Internet locations".

Registry method (Home edition, unofficial and limited): Run regedit, navigate to HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\WindowsUpdate\AU, create a DWORD (32-bit) value named NoAutoUpdate set to 1, then restart. This method may be reset by system updates or have limited effect.

Disabling Windows Update service (last resort, not recommended): Run services.msc, locate Windows Update, set Startup type to Disabled, and stop the service. The system may re-enable it automatically, especially after major updates or reboots, and this approach risks security issues and is not advised.

Microsoft recommends keeping automatic updates enabled to ensure ongoing protection against security threats and to maintain system stability.
The primary benefit of Automatic Updates lies in reducing vulnerability exposure windows by ensuring prompt delivery of security patches, thereby enhancing overall device and ecosystem health. However, a noted issue is the potential for forced reboots that may interrupt workflows if not aligned with Active Hours or restart policies, leading to user frustration in unmanaged consumer scenarios.

Critical Update Notification Utility

The Critical Update Notification Utility (CUN) was a downloadable Microsoft tool introduced for Windows 98 in 1998 and made available for Windows 2000 users to facilitate the detection and installation of high-priority security patches. It ran as a background process, displaying an icon in the system tray to indicate its active status and readiness to check for updates.
The utility's core functionality involved periodic scans for Internet connectivity, initiating every 5 minutes during the first hour of operation and then every 60 minutes if no connection was found. Upon detecting a connection, it queried the Windows Update website for critical updates specific to the user's operating system. If updates were available, CUN presented a dialog box notification prompting the user to either view and install them immediately via the integrated web interface or postpone the alert for 24 hours. The tool integrated with Internet Explorer to launch the Windows Update page for browsing and downloading patches, ensuring users could act on urgent security fixes without manual intervention. After a successful check or user postponement, it suspended further scans for 24 hours to avoid excessive resource use.
During the Windows XP era, the CUN remained relevant for Windows 2000 installations, aiding users in addressing major security threats like the Blaster worm in 2003 by alerting to available high-priority patches. Its notification frequency was predefined and not user-configurable, with the tool resetting to default intervals via registry timestamps unaffected by system restarts.
The CUN was deprecated after the rollout of built-in Automatic Updates in Windows Millennium Edition and Windows 2000 Service Pack 4, which incorporated similar proactive checking and notification features directly into the OS. It was phased out in subsequent versions starting with Windows Vista, replaced by more advanced integrated systems, and received no further support beyond Windows 7 as Microsoft shifted to unified update mechanisms. This early tool laid foundational concepts for user alerting, influencing the development of modern toast notifications in Windows 10 and 11 for urgent update prompts.

Enterprise and Management Features

Windows Update for Business

Windows Update for Business (WUfB), introduced with the Windows 10 Anniversary Update in 2016, provides enterprise administrators with policies to manage the deployment of feature and quality updates across organizational devices without requiring on-premises infrastructure like Windows Server Update Services (WSUS). It enables deferral of feature updates for up to 365 days and quality updates for up to 30 days, allowing IT teams to test updates in controlled environments before broader rollout. These deferrals can be configured via mobile device management (MDM) solutions such as Microsoft Intune, which integrates with cloud-based management to enforce policies on domain-joined or Azure AD-joined devices.
A key strategy in WUfB is the use of deployment rings, which segment devices into pilot, test, and production groups to facilitate phased rollouts and minimize disruptions from untested updates. This approach supports integration with Azure Active Directory (Azure AD) for seamless cloud management, enabling administrators to assign ring policies dynamically based on device groups or user roles in Microsoft Endpoint Manager. Policies are primarily configured through Group Policy Objects (GPOs) under the WindowsUpdate registry key, which control update behaviors such as pausing deployments or setting deadlines. For wide-area network (WAN) optimization, WUfB incorporates BranchCache, a peer-caching mechanism that reduces bandwidth usage by allowing devices in remote locations to share update files locally rather than downloading them repeatedly from the internet.
In Windows 11 environments, WUfB extends support for hotpatch deferrals, enabling organizations to delay cumulative security updates that apply without full reboots, thereby maintaining productivity while addressing vulnerabilities. Compliance reporting is enhanced through Update Compliance in Microsoft Endpoint Manager (now part of Microsoft Intune), which provides analytics on update deployment status, failure rates, and adherence to policies across the fleet. By implementing these features, enterprises can reduce the risk of breaking changes from premature update adoption, ensuring stability in mission-critical systems.

Policy Configuration and Deployment Tools

Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) is an on-premises server role in Windows Server that enables organizations to manage the distribution of updates released through Microsoft Update by caching them locally and allowing administrators to approve or decline specific updates before deployment across the network. As of September 2024, Microsoft has deprecated WSUS, indicating no further development of new features, though it remains available and supported in Windows Server 2025. Microsoft encourages migration to cloud-based update management solutions such as Azure Update Manager. WSUS is installed as a role via the Server Manager console, where administrators configure synchronization sources, such as Microsoft Update, and set up downstream replica servers for hierarchical deployments in large environments. Once deployed, WSUS supports detailed reporting on update compliance, installation status, and detection results for client computers, helping IT teams monitor and audit update adherence.
Microsoft Endpoint Configuration Manager, formerly known as System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM), provides advanced integration for software update management, including inventory scanning of client devices to identify missing updates, automated synchronization with WSUS, and support for phased rollouts that deploy updates in waves to minimize disruption. This tool enables granular control over update groups, deployment schedules, and compliance reporting, making it suitable for enterprise-scale environments where updates need to be tested and rolled out progressively across device collections.
Group Policy Objects (GPOs) offer centralized configuration for Windows Update behaviors through administrative templates located under Computer Configuration > Policies > Administrative Templates > Windows Components > Windows Update > Manage end user experience. These allow settings for update schedules, automatic download and installation options, pausing updates for up to 35 days, and exclusions for specific categories such as drivers to prevent compatibility issues. A specific policy, "Do not include drivers with Windows Updates," can be enabled to exclude drivers from Windows quality updates, preventing automatic installation of drivers through monthly cumulative updates. The equivalent registry method for Windows 11 (valid as of February 2026) involves opening Registry Editor (regedit), navigating to HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\WindowsUpdate (creating the WindowsUpdate key if missing), creating a new DWORD (32-bit) value named ExcludeWUDriversInQualityUpdate, setting its value to 1, and restarting the PC. For Windows Pro, Enterprise, and Education editions, administrators can use the Local Group Policy Editor by running gpedit.msc to configure these locally. For Windows 10, a key policy is "Configure Automatic Updates," located at Computer Configuration > Administrative Templates > Windows Components > Windows Update > Configure Automatic Updates. When set to Enabled, the available options are:

2: Notify for download and notify for install (users are notified when updates are available, then manually download and install them).

3: Auto download and notify for install (updates are automatically downloaded in the background; users are notified when ready to install).

4: Auto download and schedule the install (updates are automatically downloaded and installed on a schedule, defaulting to 3:00 AM daily if unspecified; includes restart behavior).

5: Allow local admin to choose setting (local administrators can select their preferred update configuration via Windows Update settings, but cannot disable automatic updates).

These options control how Windows 10 handles update detection, download, and installation. Option 7 (Auto download, notify to install, notify to restart) may appear in some versions but is primarily for Windows Server 2016+. Another essential policy for enterprise environments using WSUS is "Specify intranet Microsoft update service location," located at Computer Configuration > Administrative Templates > Windows Components > Windows Update. This policy enables administrators to set an intranet update service location (e.g., a WSUS server URL) for detecting and downloading updates, overriding the default public Microsoft Update servers. When enabled, it causes the "Some settings are managed by your organization" message to appear in the Windows Update settings interface, indicating that certain configurations are managed by organizational policies. Additionally, enabling the policy "Do not connect to any Windows Update Internet locations" prevents connections to Microsoft's update servers, which is particularly useful in WSUS-managed environments or to limit internet-based updates. While these represent the most effective official methods for advanced control in Pro/Enterprise editions, they do not enable a permanent and complete disablement of all automatic updates, as Microsoft may enforce critical security updates via alternative mechanisms to maintain system security. Disabling or heavily restricting updates can leave systems vulnerable to exploits and cause compatibility issues; Microsoft strongly recommends keeping automatic updates enabled. For cloud-managed scenarios, Microsoft Intune uses update ring policies to define deferral periods for quality and feature updates, grace periods for installations, and user experience controls such as restart notifications, enabling seamless policy application to Windows devices without on-premises infrastructure.
Best practices for these tools emphasize optimizing network resources, such as scheduling WSUS synchronizations daily during off-peak hours to keep update metadata current without overwhelming bandwidth, or weekly for less dynamic environments, while enabling express installation files to transmit only update deltas and reduce downloads from WSUS servers to clients by a factor of two. Bandwidth throttling can be configured in WSUS to limit download speeds during synchronization and client approvals, and regular maintenance like declining superseded updates helps prevent database bloat and ensures efficient storage usage.
In Windows 11 and Windows Server 2025, WSUS receives enhancements for hotpatch support, allowing security updates to be applied without full reboots on compatible editions, which integrates with policy configurations to enable this feature during approval workflows. For hybrid environments, Azure Update Manager provides a cloud-based complement to WSUS, supporting on-premises and Azure Arc-enabled servers with unified scheduling, compliance tracking, and hotpatch orchestration to manage updates across mixed infrastructures.

Command-Line Update Tools

Command-line tools for Windows Update enable advanced users and system administrators to automate detection, download, installation, and maintenance tasks without relying on graphical interfaces. These utilities are particularly useful for scripting repetitive operations, troubleshooting, and managing updates in enterprise environments or on headless systems. Key tools include executables like USOClient.exe for triggering update actions, PowerShell modules for querying and applying updates, and servicing commands such as DISM and SFC for post-update repairs.
In modern Windows versions, USOClient.exe serves as the Update Session Orchestrator, providing granular control over update sessions. It supports commands like StartScan to begin scanning for updates, StartDownload to queue downloads of detected updates, and StartInstall to proceed with installation. Administrators often use USOClient.exe StartScan in elevated command prompts to mimic manual checks during troubleshooting, ensuring the process integrates with the Windows Update service without user intervention.
PowerShell provides robust scripting capabilities through the PSWindowsUpdate community module, which is recommended in Microsoft documentation for managing updates programmatically. After installing the module with Install-Module PSWindowsUpdate, cmdlets such as Get-WUList (or the updated Get-WindowsUpdate) query available updates, while Install-WUUpdate handles installation with options for acceptance, reboot control, and filtering by category. This module supports remote execution via Invoke-Command, making it ideal for batch processing across multiple machines.
For offline servicing and integrity checks after updates, the Deployment Image Servicing and Management (DISM) tool and System File Checker (SFC) are essential. DISM's /Cleanup-Image /RestoreHealth command scans and repairs the component store, often run as DISM /Online /Cleanup-Image /RestoreHealth in an elevated prompt to fix corruption that could block future updates; it may source files from Windows Update or a specified path. Complementing this, SFC verifies system files with sfc /scannow, restoring any mismatches from the component store. These are typically executed post-update to ensure system stability.
When Windows Update fails to detect or install updates due to corrupted components, a manual reset can be performed via command line as a troubleshooting step. This involves stopping the relevant services, renaming the cache directories, and restarting the services.
Warning: It is not safe to clear or rename the Windows Update cache (such as the contents of the SoftwareDistribution folder) while an update is actively downloading, installing, or pending. Doing so risks interrupting the process, potentially causing update failures, file corruption, or requiring re-downloads of updates. Standard troubleshooting requires stopping the relevant services first and performing the cache clear only when no updates are actively running or pending installation.
Open an elevated Command Prompt and execute the following sequence:
net stop wuauserv
net stop cryptSvc
net stop bits
net stop msiserver
ren C:\Windows\SoftwareDistribution SoftwareDistribution.old
ren C:\Windows\System32\catroot2 catroot2.old
net start wuauserv
net start cryptSvc
net start bits
net start msiserver
After completing these steps, retry the Windows Update process. This is a simplified method; for a more comprehensive procedure including additional steps like reregistering DLLs, consult the official Microsoft documentation.
Scripting enhances automation by combining these tools in batch files or scheduled tasks. A simple batch file for silent update installation might include stopping services, running USOClient commands, and restarting them, saved as a .bat file and executed via an elevated prompt. For scheduling, integrate with Task Scheduler using schtasks /create to run the script at intervals, such as daily scans with PowerShell invocations like Install-WUUpdate -AcceptAll -AutoReboot. These scripts can log output to files for auditing, but must be tested to avoid conflicts with active update sessions.
These tools have inherent limitations: they lack graphical feedback, requiring reliance on logs or verbose output for monitoring; elevated administrator privileges are mandatory for all operations to access system services and files. In Windows 11, update processes enforced by these commands include compatibility checks for Secure Boot, ensuring the firmware supports it before applying security-related updates that could affect boot integrity.

Related Services and Integrations

Microsoft Update Catalog

The Microsoft Update Catalog is a centralized online repository maintained by Microsoft, enabling users to search for and download standalone update packages for Microsoft software products. Hosted at catalog.update.microsoft.com, it serves as a key resource in the Windows Update ecosystem, allowing manual acquisition of updates in Microsoft Update Standalone (.MSU) format without relying on automatic delivery mechanisms. This is particularly valuable for enterprise environments, offline installations, and scenarios requiring precise control over update deployment, such as building custom driver packs or servicing isolated systems.
Launched to support IT professionals in managing updates across corporate networks, the catalog facilitates searches by Knowledge Base (KB) article numbers, operating system versions, product names, update classifications (e.g., security, critical, or drivers), or hardware-specific identifiers like device models and IDs. Users can add selected updates to a virtual basket for bulk downloads, a feature compatible with modern web browsers; legacy support for Internet Explorer included an ActiveX control to streamline large-scale retrievals. These capabilities address common needs like preparing updates for air-gapped networks or compiling targeted collections of drivers for hardware compatibility testing.
The repository encompasses a comprehensive range of content, including all Windows operating system updatessuch as cumulative security patches, feature updates, and servicing stack updatesalongside non-OS Microsoft products like SQL Server and System Center components. Each entry provides rich metadata, including applicability rules that detail compatible products, supported languages, processor architectures (e.g., x86, x64, ARM64), and revision histories, helping users verify suitability before download. For instance, the catalog includes filters and packages tailored for ARM64-based systems, supporting devices like Copilot+ PCs with their AI-optimized hardware requirements.
Integrations with enterprise management tools enhance its utility; notably, updates can be imported into Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) via PowerShell cmdlets, which query the catalog by UpdateID and download metadata or files for synchronization, superseding the deprecated ActiveX import method. Programmatic access is further enabled through scripting interfaces that allow automated retrieval based on specific criteria, streamlining workflows in tools like System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM). Separate repositories handle product-specific content, such as Office updates.

Office Update and Third-Party Compatibility

The Office Update service enables the delivery of security patches and feature updates for Microsoft Office applications through integration with Microsoft Update. This service has been available for Office installations since the release of Office 2003, where updates such as Service Pack 3 were distributed via Microsoft's automatic update mechanisms. To receive these updates automatically, users must opt in via Windows Update settings by enabling the option to "Receive updates for other Microsoft products when you update Windows," which scans for and installs relevant Office patches alongside Windows updates.
Integration between Windows Update and Office occurs through detection mechanisms that identify installed Office versions and applicable updates. Tools such as the Microsoft Support and Recovery Assistant perform scans to assess Office configurations and known issues, generating reports that inform the update process. Updates are then applied based on the installation type: Click-to-Run technology, used for Microsoft 365 subscriptions and most recent perpetual versions like Office 2021, streams updates directly from Microsoft's content delivery network for faster deployment; in contrast, older volume-licensed editions rely on Windows Installer (MSI) packages, which are managed through administrative tools or manual installation. This dual approach ensures compatibility while minimizing disruptions, with Click-to-Run preferred for its cloud-based efficiency in enterprise environments.
Windows Update supports third-party compatibility primarily through optional updates for digitally signed drivers submitted by hardware vendors, such as NVIDIA's graphics drivers, which appear in the optional updates section for user selection. While it does not facilitate direct updates for non-Microsoft applications, the service maintains ecosystem stability by verifying hardware and driver compatibility during operating system upgrades, including provisions like the Program Compatibility Troubleshooter to address potential issues with legacy software.
A key challenge in this integration arises from the end-of-support timelines for perpetual Office licenses, which align closely with Windows versions to encourage modernization. For instance, Office 2019, a perpetual license edition, reached end of support on October 14, 2025, after which no further security updates or technical assistance will be provided, increasing vulnerability risks. Microsoft recommends migrating to Microsoft 365 subscriptions, which offer continuous updates and enhanced features, to maintain alignment with evolving Windows security standards. As of April 2025, Microsoft reported over 430 million paid commercial Microsoft 365 seats, underscoring the scale of this transition.

Complementary Third-Party Services

Third-party services play a crucial role in extending Windows Update's capabilities by addressing gaps in OEM-specific drivers, application patching, and system auditing, without supplanting core operating system updates. These tools often integrate seamlessly with Windows Update to ensure comprehensive device management, particularly in enterprise environments where customized hardware and software ecosystems require targeted interventions.
Vendor-specific tools from original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) like Dell and HP provide specialized updates for drivers and firmware that complement Windows Update's general hardware support. Dell Command | Update is a standalone application designed for commercial Dell client systems, enabling the detection, download, and installation of the latest drivers, BIOS, and firmware updates directly from Dell's repositories. It integrates with management platforms such as Microsoft Endpoint Configuration Manager (SCCM) and Intune, allowing administrators to schedule updates alongside Windows Update cycles to maintain OEM-specific compatibility. Similarly, HP Support Assistant automates the identification and deployment of HP-optimized drivers and software enhancements, which Windows Update may not fully cover due to its focus on universal components; this tool scans for updates via HP's servers and prompts installations that align with Windows' driver framework, reducing potential conflicts in HP hardware deployments.
Independent third-party managers focus on application-level patching, operating in parallel with Windows Update to handle non-OS software. Ninite facilitates the bulk installation and updating of popular desktop applicationssuch as browsers, media players, and productivity toolswhile explicitly excluding operating system components to avoid interference with Microsoft's update mechanisms. Users select apps via a web interface, and Ninite's executable handles silent downloads and installations from official sources, ensuring updates remain current without altering Windows core files. For enterprise scenarios, Patch My PC automates the patching of over 2,800 third-party applications, integrating with tools like SCCM and Intune to deploy updates through a cloud-based publisher that supplements Windows Update by targeting vendor-specific software vulnerabilities. This approach streamlines compliance by scheduling app patches during off-peak hours, distinct from OS servicing.
Command-line alternatives like Chocolatey and Winget offer flexible package management for Windows applications, drawing from community repositories but designed not to replace Windows Update's role in OS maintenance. Chocolatey, an open-source CLI tool, allows administrators to install, upgrade, and manage software packages via scripts, pulling from a central repository of vetted manifests that emphasize application binaries over system-level changes. Winget, Microsoft's official Windows Package Manager, similarly uses a community-driven repository hosted on GitHub, enabling commands for discovering and updating apps like development tools and utilities, with built-in safeguards to prevent conflicts with Windows servicing stacks. Both tools support scripting for automated workflows, such as integrating with PowerShell for bulk deployments in managed environments.
Compatibility tools like Belarc Advisor enhance oversight by generating detailed audit reports on installed software, hardware configurations, and missing updates, helping users verify alignment with Windows Update status. This free utility scans systems to produce browser-based profiles that highlight unpatched applications and security gaps, aiding in proactive remediation without directly applying updates. However, reliance on third-party services introduces risks, particularly with unsigned updates that bypass Windows' driver signing enforcement; such updates can introduce malware or kernel-level vulnerabilities, as unsigned code evades integrity checks and may execute arbitrary operations, potentially compromising system stability and exposing data to exploits. Microsoft enforces driver signing to mitigate these threats, but third-party tools must adhere to it to avoid enforcement blocks via Secure Boot or Windows Defender.
In the 2025 landscape, third-party update services are increasingly aligned with zero-trust security models, incorporating continuous verification and least-privilege access to scanner tools that monitor patch compliance across hybrid environments. Vendors like Palo Alto Networks and Zscaler integrate update auditing into zero-trust platforms, ensuring every device update is authenticated before deployment, reducing lateral movement risks in breached networks. Additionally, integrations with Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) toolssuch as Splunk or Microsoft Sentinelenable real-time monitoring of Windows Update events, logging patch failures or delays for anomaly detection and automated alerting, which has seen broader adoption amid rising ransomware threats targeting outdated systems.

References

Windows Update: FAQ - Microsoft Support

Get started with Windows Update | Microsoft Learn

Install Windows Updates - Microsoft Support

Microsoft Announces Windows 98 Is Scheduled to Be Available on ...

 Microsoft System Center Software Update Management Field ...

How to schedule automatic updates in Windows - Microsoft Learn

Microsoft Statement on the "Slammer" Worm Attack - Source

Windows 98, 98SE and ME: Information about Support Lifecycle and ...

Windows XP - Microsoft Lifecycle

Description of the Windows Update Standalone Installer in Windows

Optimize Windows update delivery | Microsoft Learn

Microsoft Store app package updates available - Windows Client

 Introducing Windows 8.1 for IT Professionals Technical Overview

Overview of Windows as a service - Deployment - Microsoft Learn

Quick guide to Windows as a service | Microsoft Learn

Back up and restore with Windows Backup - Microsoft Support

What's new in Windows 11, version 24H2 for IT pros | Microsoft Learn

Reflecting on 20 years of Windows Patch Tuesday

KB4522133: Procedure to continue receiving security updates after ...

Windows 11 version 25H2 now available

Release notes for Hotpatch on Windows 11 Enterprise version 25H2

Windows 11 - release information - Microsoft Learn

Microsoft issues important Windows 11 25H2 installation caution for ...

New Features in Windows Server Preview Build 26040

Azure Hybrid Benefit for Windows Server | Microsoft Learn

Connecting Windows Server to Azure hybrid services - Microsoft Learn

Making every Windows 11 PC an AI PC | Windows Experience Blog

Configure Delivery Optimization (DO) for Windows - Microsoft Learn

Plan for mandatory Microsoft Entra multifactor authentication (MFA)

Microsoft's New Mandatory MFA Policies - Lume Strategies

Extended Security Updates (ESU) program for Windows 10

Transforming security and compliance at Microsoft with Windows ...

Windows client updates, channels, and tools - Microsoft Learn

Update release cycle for Windows clients | Microsoft Learn

Description of the standard terminology - Windows Client

How Windows Update works | Microsoft Learn

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/deployment/update/do/waas-delivery-optimization

Manage device restarts after updates - Microsoft Learn

Fix Windows Update corruptions and installation failures

Manage additional Windows Update settings | Microsoft Learn

Windows Update Agent API - Win32 apps | Microsoft Learn

Determining the Current Version of WUA - Win32 apps

What is Delivery Optimization? - Microsoft Learn

Delivery Optimization reference | Microsoft Learn

Servicing stack updates | Microsoft Learn

Windows Update common errors and mitigation - Microsoft Learn

Does windows update service support and uses ipv6 or rely only on ...

Configuring Windows Update to Use a Proxy Server - Sign In - O'Reilly

Windows Update Restored v2 Home Page

Microsoft Security Bulletin MS11-009 - Important

Microsoft Security Bulletin MS12-063 - Critical

Pause updates in Windows - Microsoft Support

New experiences currently rolling out for Windows 11

Windows keyboard shortcuts for accessibility - Microsoft Support

Updates are automatically downloaded - Windows Client

How to change your Automatic Updates settings by using Windows ...

Keep your PC up to date with active hours - Microsoft Support

Configure Windows Update client policies via Group Policy

Windows Update client policies | Microsoft Learn

Configure Windows Update client policies - Microsoft Learn

Windows Update: FAQ - Microsoft Support

Description of the Windows Critical Update Notification utility

Learn about using Windows Update client policies in Microsoft Intune

Configure Windows Update rings policy in Intune - Microsoft Learn

Windows Update Rings for Azure AD registered device

Configure BranchCache for Windows client updates - Microsoft Learn

Hotpatch updates | Microsoft Learn

Windows Update reports for Microsoft Intune

Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) Overview | Microsoft Learn

Deploy Windows Server Update Services | Microsoft Learn

Plan Your WSUS Deployment | Microsoft Learn

Software update management documentation - Microsoft Learn

Introduction to software updates - Configuration Manager

Windows Update settings you can manage with Intune Update Ring ...

Windows Server Update Services best practices - Microsoft Learn

Hotpatch for Windows Server | Microsoft Learn

Azure Update Manager overview | Microsoft Learn

Step 2 - Configure WSUS | Microsoft Learn

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/answers/questions/5612958/windows-update-powershell-script

Features Removed or No Longer Developed in Windows Server

How can I tell if `wuauclt` is doing anything? - Microsoft Q&A

USOclient - Microsoft Q&A

Windows Update (Windows 10) from Command Line (usual ways not

WindowsUpdate Module - Microsoft Learn

DISM Operating System Package (.cab or .msu) Servicing ...

schtasks create - Microsoft Learn

Additional resources for Windows Update - Windows Client

Windows Update - Requires Administrator Permission, but am ...

How to force Windows 10 updates to install using the command line

Windows 11 and Secure Boot - Microsoft Support

WSUS and the Microsoft Update Catalog

How to download updates that include drivers and hotfixes from the ...

Microsoft Update Catalog

Microsoft Readies Office 2003 SP3 for February Release - eWeek

Office 2003 Service Pack 3 (SP3) - Microsoft Update Catalog

Update Office with Microsoft Update

Enterprise version of Microsoft Support and Recovery Assistant

Office installed with Click-to-Run and Windows Installer on same ...

NVIDIA Driver Update Through Device Manager - Microsoft Learn

Make older apps or programs compatible with the latest version of ...

End of support for Office 2016 and Office 2019 - Microsoft Support

Microsoft Statistics 2025: Revenue, Cloud, AI & Workforce Insights

Dell Command | Update | Dell US

HP PCs - Updating drivers using Windows update | HP Support

Dell Command Integration Suite for Microsoft System Center

Ninite - Install or Update Multiple Apps at Once

Advanced Patch Management Software for Third-Party Updates

Use WinGet to install and manage applications | Microsoft Learn

Belarc Advisor

 THE HIDDEN DANGERS INSIDE WINDOWS & LINUX COMPUTERS

Top 8 Zero Trust Vendors & Providers in 2025 - Rippling

10 Zero Trust Vendors in 2025 - SentinelOne

Stream alerts to monitoring solutions - Microsoft Defender for Cloud

How to uninstall a Windows Update - Microsoft Support

How to uninstall a Windows Update

Windows Update Troubleshooter

Troubleshoot problems updating Windows

Additional resources for Windows Update

Additional resources for Windows Update

Pause updates in Windows 11

Metered connections in Windows 11

Windows Update security

What are the IP ranges for Microsofty Windows update?

Windows Update security

Manage additional Windows Update settings

Configure Windows Update client policies via Group Policy

Manage additional Windows Update settings

Configure Windows Update for Business

Get help with Windows upgrade and installation errors

How to Read Windows Update Logs

Manage additional Windows Update settings | Microsoft Learn

Deploy updates using Windows Server Update Services
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion