XCOPY Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
XCOPY
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 XCOPY is a command-line utility included in Microsoft Windows and MS-DOS operating systems that copies files and directories, including subdirectories, from one location to another, offering greater functionality than the basic COPY command.
Introduced in MS-DOS version 3.2 as an enhancement to address the limitations of the original COPY command, which processed files one at a time and required frequent disk swaps on early hardware like single-floppy systems, XCOPY was designed to buffer multiple files in memory for more efficient transfers. The tool originated to simplify copying directory trees and large sets of files, particularly in resource-constrained environments of the 1980s, and has evolved to support modern features while remaining backward-compatible. It is available as an external executable (XCOPY.EXE) in all subsequent Windows versions, including Windows 11, where it continues to be used for tasks like backups, deployments, and mirroring directory structures.
The command's syntax allows specification of source and destination paths along with numerous switches to control behavior, such as /s and /e for including subdirectories (empty or not), /d for copying only files newer than a given date, /h for hidden and system files, and /v for verification to ensure data integrity. Key parameters enable selective copying based on attributes like archive bits (/a or /m), read-only files (/r), and ownership/permissions (/o and /x), making it suitable for network transfers (/z) and unbuffered operations (/j) on high-performance storage. Unlike ROBOCOPY, a more advanced successor introduced in Windows Vista for robust mirroring and logging, XCOPY remains a lightweight option for straightforward file replication without requiring elevated privileges in many scenarios. Common use cases include deploying applications via simple batch scripts, as seen in ASP.NET setups, and creating incremental backups by combining switches like /d and /m. Exit codes from 0 to 5 provide feedback on operation success, errors, or interruptions, aiding automation in scripts.

History and Overview

Introduction to XCOPY

XCOPY is a command-line utility in Microsoft operating systems designed for copying files, directories, and entire directory trees, including subdirectories, to provide advanced file replication capabilities beyond basic operations. Introduced as an enhancement to handle complex copying tasks, it supports efficient duplication of directory structures across local drives or network locations, with options to include hidden and system files that are not copied by default. Unlike the simpler COPY command, which is limited to individual files or simple concatenations, XCOPY enables recursive copying of folder hierarchies, making it suitable for tasks like backups and deployments.
First appearing in MS-DOS version 3.2 in 1986, XCOPY was developed to address the limitations of earlier file management tools by allowing users to copy multiple files and subdirectories in a single operation, including verification for accuracy. This external command, distributed as XCOPY.EXE, quickly became a standard for power users needing to replicate directory structures without manual intervention for each file.
As of 2025, XCOPY remains included in Windows 11, continuing to function for legacy and scripting purposes despite recommendations since Windows Vista to use the more robust Robocopy for advanced copying needs. Its persistence reflects its reliability in command-line environments, though Microsoft documentation emphasizes Robocopy for modern scenarios involving large-scale or networked transfers.

Development and Evolution

XCOPY was developed by Microsoft and first introduced as an external command in MS-DOS version 3.2, released in 1986, to provide enhanced file and directory copying capabilities beyond the basic COPY command. Developed to overcome the inefficiencies of the COPY command, which handled files one at a time and often required manual disk swaps on early hardware, XCOPY buffered multiple files in memory for faster transfers in 1980s computing environments. Variants of XCOPY were subsequently included in other DOS-compatible environments, including IBM PC DOS 3.20 and DR DOS 6.0, adapting the core functionality for those systems.
As Microsoft transitioned to its Windows NT lineage, XCOPY was integrated into Windows NT 3.1 (1993), Windows 2000 (2000), and Windows XP (2001), with enhancements to support long filenames enabled by the NTFS file system, allowing preservation of extended naming conventions up to 255 characters per component. In 2018, with the release of Windows Server 2019 and corresponding Windows 10 updates, the /compress switch was added to XCOPY, enabling inline SMB compression during network transfers to optimize bandwidth usage for large file operations.
Cross-platform adaptations have extended XCOPY's availability beyond proprietary Microsoft systems. The FreeDOS implementation, developed by contributors like Rene Ableidinger, is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) and maintains compatibility with classic DOS behaviors while supporting modern FreeDOS environments. Similarly, ReactOS includes an XCOPY utility under the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL), ensuring compatibility with Windows command-line scripts in its open-source OS framework. Novell NetWare environments historically supported XCOPY-like operations through DOS client integrations for file transfers across networked volumes.
Microsoft marked XCOPY as deprecated starting with Windows Vista in 2007, recommending Robocopy as the more robust successor for advanced copying tasks, though it has been retained for backward compatibility in all subsequent releases, including Windows 11 (2021) and updates through 2025. Despite deprecation, XCOPY remains relevant in scripting and automation scenarios, with post-2020 maintenance addressing compatibility issues in Windows environments, such as handling hidden directory structures created by certain switches.

Command Syntax

Basic Syntax

The basic syntax of the XCOPY command follows the structure xcopy <source> , where <source> specifies the files or directories to copy, <destination> indicates the target location, /switches are optional parameters that modify the operation, and /exclude:filename lists one or more files containing strings to exclude from the copy process. This format allows XCOPY to handle both simple file transfers and complex directory trees, with the command executing from the Windows Command Prompt or batch scripts.
The <source> parameter is required and can represent a single file, directory, drive path, or wildcard expression (e.g., C:\folder\*.* to include all files in a directory). The <destination> parameter is optional and specifies the target drive, directory, or file path (e.g., D:\backup); if omitted, files are copied to the current working directory, and if the destination appears ambiguoussuch as when copying multiple files to a single nameXCOPY prompts the user to confirm whether it should treat the destination as a file or directory unless modified by switches.
XCOPY returns specific exit codes to indicate the outcome of the operation, which can be checked in batch files using the IF ERRORLEVEL construct for error handling or logging. The following table summarizes these codes:
Exit CodeMeaning
0Files were copied without error.
1No files were found to copy.
2User pressed CTRL+C to terminate the operation.
4Initialization error occurred (e.g., insufficient memory, disk space, invalid drive name, or syntax error).
5Disk write error occurred.
For error handling, XCOPY prompts the user for confirmation before overwriting existing destination files by default, displaying a message like "Overwrite (Yes/No/All)?" for each conflict; this behavior can be suppressed or enabled via switches. Similarly, when the destination might be interpreted as either a file or directory (e.g., copying a wildcard source to a non-existent path), it prompts for clarification unless the operation context implies a directory. XCOPY automatically creates necessary destination directories during the copy process if they do not exist, without prompting, provided the source includes subdirectory contents.

Switches and Parameters

XCOPY offers a range of switches and parameters that modify its default behavior, enabling precise control over the copying process. These options are prefixed with a forward slash (/) and can be combined in the command line to suit specific needs, such as handling directories, preserving file attributes, selecting files based on criteria, or optimizing network transfers. The following sections detail key switches grouped by function, based on official documentation.

Directory Handling Switches

The /S switch instructs XCOPY to copy directories and subdirectories, excluding empty ones, allowing for the replication of hierarchical structures without unnecessary empty folders. The /E switch extends this by copying all subdirectories, including empty ones, and is commonly used alongside /S or /T to ensure complete directory trees are preserved. For scenarios where only the structure is needed, the /T switch copies the subdirectory tree but skips files themselves; combining it with /E includes empty directories in the output. Additionally, the /I parameter assumes the destination is a directory if the source is a directory or multiple files are specified, preventing ambiguity in batch operations.

File Attribute Switches

To handle specific file properties, the /H switch enables the copying of hidden and system files, which are ignored by default. The /R switch allows overwriting of read-only files at the destination, facilitating updates to protected content. The /K switch preserves the read-only attribute from source files to the destination, maintaining original protection levels. For NTFS file systems, the /O switch copies file ownership and discretionary access control lists (DACLs), ensuring security permissions are transferred accurately.

Selection Switches

Selection switches refine which files are copied based on attributes or dates. The /D:m-d-y switch copies only files modified on or after the specified date (in MM-DD-YYYY format); if no date is provided, it copies files newer than their destination counterparts. The /M switch targets files with the archive attribute set, copying them and then clearing the attribute to indicate completion, useful for incremental backups. For exclusions, the /EXCLUDE:file parameter reads one or more files containing strings or patterns, skipping any matching files or paths during the copy.

Other Parameters

Beyond core selection, parameters like /Y suppress prompts for overwriting existing files, streamlining automated scripts, while /-Y enables those prompts for confirmation. The /Z parameter enables restartable mode for network copies, allowing interrupted transfers to resume without restarting from the beginning. The /I parameter, as noted earlier, aids in directory assumption for multi-file operations.

Recent Additions

Introduced in Windows Server 2022 and Windows 11, the /COMPRESS switch requests SMB compression during the transfer of compressible files over the network, reducing bandwidth usage for large, uncompressed data like virtual hard disks without applying compression to already compressed formats such as ZIP or JPEG files.

Core Usage

File and Directory Copying

XCOPY enables the replication of individual files from a source to a destination path, preserving file data and timestamps by default. NTFS permissions and ownership require the /O switch to copy. The basic syntax for copying a single file is XCOPY <source> <destination>, where wildcards like *.txt can be used in the source to select multiple matching files. To include hidden and system files during the copy, the /H switch is applied, while the /R switch allows overwriting of read-only files.
For replicating entire directory trees, XCOPY uses switches to mirror the source structure at the destination. The /S switch copies directories and subdirectories except empty ones, whereas /E includes all subdirectories, even empty directories, providing a complete tree replication. Wildcards in the source path facilitate selective copying within the tree, such as XCOPY C:\source\*.* D:\dest /E, which replicates all files and folders from the source. The /I switch assumes the destination is a directory if the source specifies multiple files or a directory, avoiding ambiguity in batch operations.
By default, XCOPY prompts for confirmation before overwriting existing files at the destination to prevent accidental data loss. The /Y switch suppresses this prompt for automated scripts, while /-Y enforces prompting even in non-interactive modes. Additionally, the /Q switch enables quiet mode to suppress non-error messages during the operation, streamlining output in command-line environments.
XCOPY supports basic network copying by specifying UNC paths for sources or destinations, such as XCOPY \\server\share\file.txt C:\local\, without built-in restartability for interrupted transfers. This allows straightforward replication across local area networks, provided the user has appropriate permissions.

Backup and Synchronization

XCOPY supports incremental backups by allowing users to copy only files that have been modified since a specified date or since the last backup operation, thereby optimizing the process for efficiency in data management scenarios. The /D switch enables this functionality: when used without a date parameter, it copies source files that are newer than the corresponding files in the destination; with a date specified in MM-DD-YYYY format, it copies files changed on or after that date. For example, the command xcopy C:\source D:\backup /D will update only the files in the destination that are older than their source counterparts, making it suitable for regular backup routines without duplicating unchanged data.
Another key feature for backup operations is the management of the archive attribute, which Windows uses to flag files that have been modified since the last backup. The /M switch copies only source files that have the archive attribute set and automatically resets this attribute after copying, facilitating incremental backup sets by targeting only altered files. This approach aligns with traditional backup strategies where the archive bit serves as a marker for changes, ensuring that subsequent runs of XCOPY with /M will skip unmodified files and maintain an efficient backup cycle.
To simulate directory mirroring for synchronization purposes, XCOPY can combine the /D switch with /E and /Y for a pseudo-synchronization that updates changed files and replicates the directory structure without prompting for overwrites. The /E parameter copies all subdirectories, including empty ones, while /Y suppresses confirmation prompts for existing destination files, allowing for a streamlined update of the target directory. For instance, xcopy C:\source\* D:\mirror /D /E /Y will copy new or updated files and recreate the full subdirectory tree, though it does not delete files from the destination that are absent in the source, distinguishing it from more advanced synchronization tools.
For ongoing backups, multi-pass techniques involve executing XCOPY repeatedly over time, leveraging the /D switch to compare file timestamps against the previous run's effective date. Users can calculate or log the date of the last backup and incorporate it into subsequent commands, such as xcopy C:\source D:\backup /D:MM-DD-YYYY /E, to ensure only files modified after that point are copied, building a series of incremental updates while preserving historical versions if stored in dated folders. This method, often scripted in batch files, supports automated scheduling for differential or cumulative backups without requiring full recreations each time.

Advanced Applications

Compression Features

The /COMPRESS switch in XCOPY enables per-file SMB compression during network file transfers, applying compression only to highly compressible content such as text files and logs to minimize data volume sent over the wire. This feature leverages the SMB protocol's built-in compression capabilities, which encode data using algorithms like LZNT1 or XPRESS to reduce transfer sizes without altering the original files. Windows Server 2025 additionally supports the LZ4 algorithm for improved compression performance in certain scenarios. In practice, it can reduce bandwidth usage by up to 50% for suitable files in controlled tests, making it particularly valuable for optimizing transfers in bandwidth-constrained environments.
This functionality is available exclusively in Windows 10 version 20H2 (build 19042) and later, as well as Windows Server 2022 and subsequent versions, requiring SMB 3.0 or higher protocols between client and server for compatibility. Earlier versions like Windows 10 build 1809 or Server 2019 do not support the switch, though basic SMB compression exists in the protocol since SMB 3.0.
Performance-wise, enabling /COMPRESS increases CPU utilization on the sending machine due to the overhead of real-time compression, but this is offset by faster overall transfers on networks with limited bandwidth, such as 1 Gbps Ethernet or Wi-Fi connections. The system automatically assesses compressibility by sampling the filetypically skipping compression for incompressible types like videos, JPEG images, or ZIP archives to prevent net performance loss. For instance, in tests over a 1 Gbps link involving large compressible datasets like a 33 GB VHDX file, effective throughput can improve from approximately 111 MB/s to 220 MB/s with compression.
To utilize this feature, append /COMPRESS to the XCOPY command alongside other relevant switches, such as /E for subdirectories and /I to assume directory mode if the destination does not exist; an example is xcopy \\source\path \\destination\path /compress /e /i. This syntax requests compression on a per-file basis during the copy operation, with the protocol handling the decision to apply it based on potential savings.

Deployment Methods

Xcopy deployment refers to a straightforward method of distributing software by using the XCOPY command to copy all required application files directly to a target directory on the destination machine, bypassing the need for registry modifications, component registrations, or formal installer packages. This approach is particularly suited for portable applications, scripts, and self-contained tools that do not require extensive system integration or ongoing updates.
The process typically begins by building the application in release mode to gather all necessary files, including executables, assemblies, and dependencies, into a source directory. These files are then replicated to the target location using XCOPY with key switches: /E to include empty directories and subdirectories, /I to treat the destination as a directory when multiple files are copied, and /Y to suppress confirmation prompts for overwriting existing files. For finer control, the /EXCLUDE switch can reference a text file listing patterns (e.g., *.tmp or config*.ini) to omit temporary or user-specific files during the copy operation. Once copied, the application can often run immediately after setting any required environment variables or shortcuts, such as a desktop link to the main executable.
Key advantages of Xcopy deployment include its simplicity, as it leverages built-in Windows tools without additional software, and the absence of administrative privileges required for installation, making it accessible for user-level deployments. Rollback is equally uncomplicated, involving the deletion of the entire destination directory to revert changes without residual effects. This method remains popular in legacy and batch-oriented environments where rapid, lightweight distribution is prioritized over advanced features like automated uninstallation.
Historically, Xcopy deployment gained prominence in early Windows ecosystems, especially with the introduction of ASP.NET in the late 1990s and early 2000s, where it facilitated the quick rollout of web applications and utilities by avoiding the complexities of MSI installers, which demanded more setup overhead and privileges. It was commonly used for deploying simple tools and components in environments lacking robust packaging infrastructure.
In modern contexts, the technique persists for deploying script-based tools, such as PowerShell modules, where files are copied directly to module paths (e.g., $env:PSModulePath) to enable immediate use without formal installation, and for certain Node.js modules by replicating directory structures to runtime environments.

Limitations and Alternatives

Technical Limitations

XCOPY encounters significant challenges with path lengths exceeding 255 characters, resulting in an "insufficient memory" error that prevents successful file or directory copying. This limitation stems from the tool's reliance on legacy Win32 API constraints, where the maximum path length (MAX_PATH) is traditionally capped at 260 characters including the null terminator, but XCOPY specifically fails beyond 255. In versions of Windows prior to Windows 10, this restriction is absolute, often leading to incomplete operations on deeply nested directory structures common in modern file systems. This limitation persists in Windows 10 and later, as XCOPY does not support extended-length paths even when long path support is enabled via the LongPathsEnabled registry value.
The utility cannot copy files that are currently open or locked by other processes, as it lacks integration with the Volume Shadow Copy Service (VSS), which would allow snapshot-based access to such files without interruption. This results in "access denied" or similar errors during operations involving system files, databases, or applications in active use, potentially halting the entire copy process unless mitigated. To continue despite these errors, the /C switch can be employed, instructing XCOPY to ignore individual failures and proceed with remaining files, though this risks incomplete backups or data inconsistencies.
Regarding attribute preservation, XCOPY does not copy junctions or symbolic links by default; instead, it recursively copies their target contents as regular directories or files, which can lead to unintended duplication or data loss in link-based structures. Symbolic links can be preserved using the /B switch on Windows Vista and later, copying the link itself rather than its contents. While XCOPY copies primary file data, metadata, and NTFS alternate data streams (ADS) by default when copying between NTFS volumes, it may not fully preserve ownership and ACL information without the /O switch.
Additional constraints include the absence of a built-in progress bar for general operations, limiting user feedback to basic file counts or percentage indicators only when using the /Z switch for network restarts; otherwise, long-running copies provide no visual progress, complicating monitoring in scripts or interactive sessions. Overwrite prompts, if not suppressed with /Y, can pause automated scripts indefinitely, requiring manual intervention. The /EXCLUDE parameter supports multiple specification files but is constrained by overall command-line length limits, effectively capping practical exclusions at around 255 entries in complex scenarios without splitting commands.

Modern Alternatives and Deprecation

Microsoft has officially discouraged the use of XCOPY since the release of Windows Vista in 2007, recommending Robocopy as its more robust successor for file and directory operations. Despite this deprecation, XCOPY remains fully functional in Windows 11 as of 2025, primarily for maintaining compatibility with legacy scripts and batch files.
XCOPY maintains broad compatibility with legacy systems, including its origins in MS-DOS, all versions of Microsoft Windows from 1.0 onward, FreeDOS distributions, and ReactOS, which emulates Windows NT command-line utilities. However, it lacks native support on modern Linux distributions, requiring emulation environments such as Cygwin or Wine to execute Windows binaries.
As the primary successor to XCOPY, Robocopy offers enhanced features including directory mirroring with the /MIR switch, automatic retries for failed operations (up to a million attempts by default), and multi-threaded copying for improved performance on large datasets. For scripting in modern Windows environments, PowerShell's Copy-Item cmdlet provides a flexible alternative, supporting recursive copies, filtering, and integration with .NET objects while avoiding the limitations of command-line tools.
To transition from XCOPY, administrators are advised to use Robocopy with /MIR for synchronization tasks to replicate directory structures exactly, including deletions in the destination; XCOPY should be reserved for simple, portable file copies in cross-platform or legacy contexts. This approach ensures future-proofing, as Robocopy and PowerShell tools receive ongoing updates in Windows 11, unlike the static XCOPY implementation.

Practical Examples

Basic Examples

One common basic use of XCOPY is to copy a single file from one location to another while suppressing confirmation prompts for overwriting existing files. The command xcopy C:\file.txt D:\backup\ /Y copies the file file.txt from the C: drive to a backup directory on the D: drive, with the /Y switch preventing the user from being asked to confirm overwrites. This operation creates the destination file if it does not exist, resulting in a single file being copied and a summary output indicating "1 File(s) copied."
For copying an entire directory including its subdirectories, a straightforward command includes options to handle empty folders and assume the destination is a directory. The command xcopy C:\source\*.* D:\dest\ /E /I recursively copies all files and subdirectories from C:\source to D:\dest, where /E ensures empty subdirectories are included and /I treats the destination as a directory if multiple files are copied. Upon execution, XCOPY creates the destination directory structure as needed, copying all contents and displaying a summary such as the number of files and directories transferred, for example, "X File(s) copied" and "Y Dir(s)."
To include hidden or system files in a directory copy, the /H switch can be added to a basic recursive operation. The command xcopy C:\docs\*.* D:\archive\ /E /H copies the entire docs directory to archive, incorporating hidden and system files via /H alongside /E for empty subdirectories. This results in the full directory tree being replicated, including otherwise excluded files, with output confirming the total files copied, such as "Z File(s) copied," and automatic creation of the archive directory if absent.

Advanced Examples

Advanced examples of XCOPY combine multiple switches to handle complex scenarios such as incremental backups, deployments with exclusions, and optimized network transfers. These operations leverage XCOPY's robustness for real-world tasks like maintaining data integrity across networks or automating selective file synchronization. By integrating switches for date filtering, attribute management, and error handling, users can tailor copies to specific needs without manual intervention.
One common advanced use is performing an incremental backup, which copies only files modified since the last backup while preserving directory structures and updating file attributes. The command xcopy C:\data\*.* D:\backup\ /D /E /M achieves this: the /D switch copies files changed on or after the specified date (or newer than the destination if no date is given), /E includes all subdirectories even if empty, and /M targets files with the archive attribute set, subsequently removing that attribute to mark them as backed up. This approach efficiently updates backups without duplicating unchanged data, commonly used in automated scripts for data archiving.
For deployments to network shares where certain files must be skipped, XCOPY supports exclusion lists alongside restartable copying. The command xcopy C:\app\*.* \\server\share\ /E /I /EXCLUDE:exclude.txt /Z deploys application files while excluding specified items: /E copies subdirectories including empty ones, /I assumes the destination is a directory if multiple files are involved, /EXCLUDE:exclude.txt skips files matching strings in the referenced text file (e.g., temporary or sensitive files listed line-by-line), and /Z enables restartable mode over networks to resume interrupted transfers. This is particularly useful for software rollouts in enterprise environments, ensuring incomplete copies can be retried without starting over.
Network transfers of compressible data, such as logs, benefit from built-in compression to reduce bandwidth usage. The command xcopy C:\logs\*.* \\remote\dest\ /E /COMPRESS optimizes this process: /E handles subdirectory inclusion, and /COMPRESS requests SMB compression for files during the transfer over the network, which is effective for text-heavy logs that compress well without significant CPU overhead on modern systems. Introduced in Windows Server 2022 and Windows 11, this switch enhances efficiency for remote backups or distributed logging.
To integrate XCOPY into automated workflows, batch scripts often incorporate error checking via the %ERRORLEVEL% environment variable, which XCOPY sets to indicate success (0) or failure (non-zero). A simple multi-line snippet might look like this:
@echo off
xcopy C:\source\*.* D:\destination\ /E /D /Y
if %ERRORLEVEL% NEQ 0 (
 echo Copy operation failed with error level %ERRORLEVEL%.
 exit /B %ERRORLEVEL%
) else (
 echo Copy completed successfully.
)
This script runs the copy with switches for subdirectories (/E), date filtering (/D), and suppressed prompts (/Y), then branches based on the exit code to log outcomes or halt execution, enabling reliable integration in larger deployment pipelines.

References

xcopy - Microsoft Learn

Xcopy Command - Computer Hope

What makes XCOPY so X? - The Old New Thing

Deploy ASP.NET applications by using Xcopy - Visual Studio

 Microsoft~ MS-DOS~ - User's Reference - Bitsavers.org

How can I change the default behavior of Windows 7 when ...

DOS 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 - The OS/2 Museum

IBM PC DOS 3.20 - PCjs Machines

SMB Compression | Microsoft Learn

xcopy - FreeDOS Base - GitLab

base/applications/cmdutils/xcopy/xcopy.c Source File - ReactOS

Using the Client 32 GUI Login Utility and the NetWare Application ...

What is the windows command line command to copy files?

Xcopy /t /e folders not visible in Windows 11 - Microsoft Learn

Does Xcopy and its switches still work in Windows 11 - Software

Xcopy

https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/itops-talk-blog/smb-compression-deflate-your-io/ba-p/1183552

SMB Compression: time & money saved - Tuxera

Activate SMB compression when copying files over the network

SMB Compression: Use Cases - StarWind

Deploy an app - WPF - Microsoft Learn

Xcopy Deployment of a Windows Forms Application

A Module to Create Modules and Advanced Functions - PowerShell ...

Hey, Scripting Guy! How Can I Install Windows PowerShell Modules ...

Maximum Path Length Limitation - Win32 apps - Microsoft Learn

The Ultimate Guide to Copying Files and Folders Using Xcopy

Windows 11's robocopy Fails to copy files that XCOPY Subsequently ...

An Introductory Guide to Robocopy - Resolve

Some Windows Server Storage I/O related commands

https://www.easeus.com/disk-copy/clone-resource/do-you-still-use-xcopy-for-disk-clone-windows-11.html

FreeDOS command: xcopy

XCOPY Alternatives for Linux: Top 6 File Copy Utilities & Similar Apps

Robocopy - Microsoft Learn

A Complete Guide to Robocopy | Petri IT Knowledgebase

Copy-Item (Microsoft.PowerShell.Management)

Hitchhiker's Guide to Robocopy: Examples & commands | PDQ

Xcopy vs Robocopy: Choosing the Perfect Copying Tool - BOBcloud
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion