YANG Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
YANG
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 YANG (Yet Another Next Generation) is a data modeling language developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to define configuration data, state data, Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs), and notifications for network management protocols, primarily NETCONF but also applicable to RESTCONF. It enables the creation of hierarchical schema trees that represent network device data in a standardized, machine-readable format, facilitating interoperability and automation in network configuration and monitoring.
The language was first specified in RFC 6020 in October 2010 as YANG version 1.0, building on earlier IETF work in the NETCONF working group to address limitations in prior modeling approaches like SMI (Structure of Management Information). Version 1.1, detailed in RFC 7950 published in August 2016, serves as a maintenance release with enhancements including the introduction of action statements for node-specific operations, anydata nodes for handling unknown YANG-modeled data, and improved support for conditional augmentations and XPath expressions. These updates maintain backward compatibility while expanding flexibility for complex network models.
YANG structures data models using modules and submodules, which define namespaces, data nodes (such as leaf, leaf-list, container, and list), built-in types (e.g., int32, string, identityref), and derived types, along with constraints via statements like must, mandatory, and when. Augmentations allow extensions to base models without altering them, supporting vendor-specific customizations while preserving core interoperability. Encoded typically in XML (with an alternative YIN XML syntax) or JSON, YANG models are manipulated through protocol operations like edit-config in NETCONF, enabling programmatic access to device datastores for configuration, state retrieval, and event notifications. This approach has become foundational for software-defined networking (SDN) and intent-based networking, with thousands of standardized modules published by the IETF and other standards bodies.

Introduction

Definition and Purpose

YANG is a data modeling language designed to define configuration data, state data, Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs), and notifications for network management protocols. Originally standing for "Yet Another Next Generation," this historical acronym is not officially used in post-development documentation. Developed as a standardized, vendor-independent approach, YANG uses a human-readable syntax to specify data structures in a way that facilitates interoperability across diverse network devices.
The primary purpose of YANG is to model both configuration datarepresenting the intended state of a network deviceand operational state datareflecting the actual runtime statusin a structured, hierarchical format suitable for manipulation via protocols such as NETCONF. It also defines RPC inputs and outputs for management operations and notifications for event reporting, ensuring a complete schema for data exchange between clients and servers in network environments. This modeling enables precise validation of data during configuration and supports automation by providing a consistent representation independent of specific vendors.
Key benefits of YANG include its support for modular and reusable data models through groupings and submodules, which promote extensibility and reduce redundancy in network management schemas. Unlike older schemas such as SNMP's Structure of Management Information (SMIv2), which are limited in expressiveness for complex hierarchies, YANG offers greater flexibility, constraint enforcement, and compatibility with XML and JSON encodings while maintaining read-only translation from SMIv2 MIBs. These features enhance simulation, testing, and automation in network operations by allowing comprehensive validation and simulation of data models before deployment.
In scope, YANG applies to both writable configuration elements (marked as "config true") and read-only operational data (marked as "config false"), distinguishing intended from actual states to support robust network management. It is primarily utilized in protocols like NETCONF for structured data exchange, including operations such as editing configurations and retrieving states.

Relation to Network Management Protocols

YANG models are primarily used with the Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF), defined in RFC 6241, to enable configuration management of network devices through structured data manipulation. NETCONF leverages YANG to define both the content and operations layers, allowing for precise retrieval, editing, and deletion of configuration and state data across diverse network elements. Additionally, YANG integrates with YANG-Push, as specified in RFC 8641, to support subscription-based notifications for datastore updates, facilitating real-time monitoring and event-driven automation in network environments.
RESTCONF, outlined in RFC 8040, extends YANG's applicability by providing an HTTP-based interface for accessing YANG-defined data models, which bridges legacy network management practices with modern web-oriented APIs. This protocol maps YANG's hierarchical structures to RESTful resources, supporting operations like GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE over HTTPS, thereby enabling simpler integration with web development tools and DevOps workflows without requiring XML expertise.
Similarly, YANG serves as the foundational modeling language for the gRPC Network Management Interface (gNMI), which uses YANG paths to structure telemetry streams and configuration requests over gRPC, enhancing high-performance data collection in large-scale networks.
The protocol-agnostic nature of YANG enables a single module to underpin multiple management protocols, fostering vendor interoperability by standardizing data representations that can be transported via NETCONF, RESTCONF, or gNMI as needed. This decoupling of modeling from transport promotes consistent data handling across heterogeneous devices, reducing integration complexities in multi-vendor deployments.

History

Development Origins

YANG's development originated as part of the IETF NETCONF working group's efforts, chartered in 2003 following an IAB workshop on network management in 2002 that highlighted the need for improved protocols to handle configuration complexity, automation, and operator requirements like transactions and rollback, moving away from the rigid structure of SNMP toward XML-based approaches. The language was conceived around 2004 to provide a dedicated data modeling tool for NETCONF, addressing SNMP's SMIv2 limitations such as flat table-based structures lacking true hierarchy and limited extensibility for vendor-specific extensions.
Key contributors to YANG included Martin Bjrklund of Tail-f Systems (now part of Cisco) as the primary editor, Andy Bierman of Brocade (previously associated with Cisco), and others such as Balazs Lengyel and David Partain from Ericsson, Juergen Schoenwaelder from Jacobs University Bremen, and Phil Shafer from Juniper Networks, with additional input from individuals at Cisco and Tail-f Systems like Kent Watsen. These experts drew on their experience in network management to shape the language, emphasizing readability, modularity, and compatibility with XML tools.
YANG's design was motivated by the shortcomings of prior modeling efforts like SNMP's SMIv2 and proposals such as SMIng, which sought to enhance SMI but remained tied to SNMP, leading to the need for a protocol-independent yet NETCONF-optimized language with strong support for data hierarchies, constraints, and augmentations. It was influenced by earlier work on XMLCONF, which explored XML schema languages like XSD and DSDL for configuration but was rejected for NETCONF due to mismatches in domain-specific requirements, as well as standards from electronic commerce such as RELAX NG for flexible XML schema definition. The initial revision of YANG modules dates to June 9, 2007, with the first working group Internet-Draft (draft-ietf-netmod-yang-00) published on May 14, 2008, directly supporting the emerging NETCONF protocol standardized in RFC 4741 in December 2006.

Versions and Milestones

YANG version 1.0 was standardized in October 2010 through RFC 6020, which defines the core syntax and semantics of the language for modeling configuration and state data manipulated by the NETCONF protocol. This initial specification introduced fundamental elements such as modules for organizing data models, basic data types, and an XML-based encoding scheme, with a primary focus on configuration data hierarchies. Complementing this, RFC 6021, also published in October 2010, specifies a collection of common derived data types to enhance reusability across YANG modules.
YANG version 1.1, released as RFC 7950 in August 2016, represents a maintenance update that maintains backward compatibility with version 1.0 while addressing ambiguities and introducing enhancements for broader applicability. Key additions include refinements to the 'if-feature' statement, allowing boolean expressions and conditional dependencies in more contexts such as bits, enumerations, and refinements, to better support feature-based modeling. It also improves support for operational data through the 'anydata' statement for untyped node sets, refinements to the 'config' substatement to toggle configuration status, and new XPath functions for metadata handling. Furthermore, version 1.1 introduces the 'deviation' statement to explicitly document server-specific variations from standard models and enables enhanced notification mechanisms tied to data nodes.
Significant milestones in YANG's evolution include its widespread adoption alongside NETCONF in the 2010s, driven by IETF standardization efforts that facilitated multi-vendor interoperability for network automation. The release of YANG 1.1 specifically addressed prior gaps in metadata expression and model deviations, promoting semantic precision without major syntactic overhauls. Following 2016, the language saw incremental advancements through errata corrections to RFC 7950 and extensions such as the YANG Patch mechanism in RFC 8072 (February 2017), which defines a structured media type for partial updates to configuration data.
Since 2017, the NETMOD working group has continued active development on YANG, focusing on module versioning requirements, semantic versioning guidelines, and package management to improve compatibility and evolution of data models, with ongoing drafts as of November 2025.
The transition to YANG 1.1 presented challenges, as vendor implementations varied in support for new features like deviations and operational data enhancements, often requiring explicit documentation of incompatibilities to ensure interoperability. Emphasis in 1.1 on semantic clarity helped mitigate these issues by clarifying rules for module revisions and conditional statements, easing adoption in diverse network environments.

Core Language Elements

Modules and Submodules

In YANG, modules serve as the primary self-contained units for defining data models, encapsulating hierarchies of schema nodes, along with remote procedure calls (RPCs), actions, and notifications. Each module is identified by a unique name and revision date, ensuring traceability and version control across implementations. Modules establish a dedicated XML namespace URI to scope all identifiers defined within them, preventing naming conflicts when combining multiple models. Additionally, a prefix provides a concise shorthand for referencing the module's elements in other parts of the model.
Submodules extend this structure by allowing large or complex modules to be divided into separately stored components, enhancing maintainability without fragmenting the overall model. A submodule belongs to a single parent module, inheriting its namespace and prefix, but it cannot be imported directly by other modules or submodulesinstead, access occurs through the parent module. This design promotes modular decomposition while maintaining a unified identity for the entire model. Submodules are particularly useful for organizing extensive definitions, such as those in enterprise-grade network configurations, where splitting logic improves readability and collaborative development.
The foundational syntax for a module begins with the module statement, which includes the yang-version directive to specify compliance with YANG 1 or 1.1, followed by mandatory namespace and prefix declarations. For example, a module might declare: module example-module { yang-version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:example"; prefix ex; }. Submodules use a parallel submodule statement, incorporating a belongs-to clause to link to the parent, such as belongs-to example-module { prefix ex; }. To incorporate submodules, the parent module employs the include statement, e.g., include "example-submodule";, which assembles the full model during parsing. Revision statements track historical changes, formatted as revision YYYY-MM-DD { description "..."; }, enabling implementations to select compatible versions.
Reuse across models is facilitated by the (/page/Import) statement in both modules and submodules, which brings in definitions from external modules while mapping their prefix locally, e.g., import example-base { prefix eb; }. This allows selective adoption of groupings, typedefs, and other constructs without duplicating code. Ownership of identifiers is strictly governed by the module's namespace, treating all elementswhether in the main module or its submodulesas globally unique within that scope. This namespace isolation ensures interoperability in multi-vendor environments, where models from different sources can be composed without identifier collisions. Modules published via standards bodies like the IETF are registered in the YANG Module Names registry to enforce global uniqueness.
Key DirectivePurposeApplicabilityExample
moduleDefines the top-level unit with name and structureModules onlymodule my-module { ... }
submoduleDefines a partial unit tied to a parentSubmodules onlysubmodule my-sub { ... }
yang-versionIndicates YANG language versionBothyang-version 1.1;
namespaceSets XML URI for scoping identifiersModules onlynamespace "urn:example:ns";
prefixProvides shorthand for referencesBothprefix mp;
includeIncorporates submodules into parentModules (for submodules)include "sub1";
belongs-toLinks submodule to parent moduleSubmodules onlybelongs-to my-module { prefix mp; }
importImports definitions from other modulesBothimport other { prefix o; }
revisionRecords version historyBothrevision 2023-01-01 { ... }

Data Types and Constraints

YANG defines a set of built-in data types that form the foundation for modeling configuration and state data, ensuring precise representation and validation across network management models. These types include numeric, textual, logical, and reference-based variants, each with defined value spaces to maintain data integrity. The language supports 19 built-in types: binary, bits, boolean, decimal64, empty, enumeration, identityref, instance-identifier, int8, int16, int32, int64, leafref, string, uint8, uint16, uint32, uint64, and union.
Numeric types provide bounded integer and decimal representations suitable for counters, identifiers, and measurements. Signed integers range from int8 (-128 to 127) to int64 (-9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807), while unsigned variants span uint8 (0 to 255) to uint64 (0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615). The decimal64 type accommodates fixed-point decimals as $ i \times 10^{-n} $, where $ n $ (fraction-digits) ranges from 1 to 18, enabling precise fractional values like percentages or rates.
Textual and logical types handle descriptive and boolean data. The string type represents any Unicode character sequence, often restricted via patterns for formats like IP addresses. Boolean accepts only "true" or "false" values. Enumerative types include enumeration, which defines a set of named integer values (e.g., "up" or "down" for interface states), and bits, which models flag sets as a collection of named positions (e.g., permissions like "read" at position 0 and "write" at position 1). The binary type stores arbitrary octet sequences, while empty denotes nodes without content, used for presence indicators.
Reference types enable inter-node linkages within models. Leafref references a specific leaf or leaf-list instance via an XPath path statement, restricting its value space to the target node's content and supporting dynamic validation. Identityref points to an abstract identity defined in a module, prefixed for namespace resolution (e.g., "if:admin"). Instance-identifier identifies any data tree node using XPath-like syntax, optionally with predicates for list keys, and can require instance existence via the 'require-instance' substatement. The union type allows a value to match one of several member types, providing flexibility for variant data.
Derived types extend built-in types through the 'typedef' statement, allowing reuse and refinement within modules or submodules. A typedef creates a new type by basing it on an existing one and applying restrictions, such as ranges for numerics (e.g., typedef speed { type uint32 { range "0 .. max"; } }), lengths for strings (e.g., maximum 255 characters), or patterns using regular expressions (e.g., pattern "{3}-{3}-{4}" for phone numbers). Units can also be specified for clarity, like "meters" for distances. These custom types promote consistency across models without altering the underlying built-in semantics.
Constraints in YANG enforce data validity and structural rules at the schema level. The 'must' statement applies XPath expressions to validate node instances, triggering errors if conditions fail (e.g., must "if:type != 'ethernet'" to prohibit certain configurations). 'Mandatory' nodes require presence in configuration data if true (default false), applying to leaves, leaf-lists, and choices. For collections, 'min-elements' sets the minimum occurrences (default 0 for lists and leaf-lists), while 'max-elements' imposes an upper limit or allows "unbounded" (default unbounded). These mechanisms collectively ensure compliant and error-free data trees.
Default values provide fallback behaviors for optional nodes, enhancing model usability. Leaves and leaf-lists can define defaults via the 'default' statement (e.g., leaf operation { type enumeration { enum add; enum remove; } default "add"; }), which the server applies if the node is absent from the data tree. For unions and identities, defaults follow similar rules, with identityrefs using prefixed names. These values must conform to the type's restrictions and support safe initialization without mandating explicit configuration.

Modeling Constructs

Hierarchical Structures

YANG models data in a tree-like hierarchy, known as the schema tree, which organizes information into a structured schema rooted at the module level and extended through nesting of nodes. This structure allows for the representation of complex network configurations and states as a series of parent-child relationships, where each node defines either data or further substructures. The schema tree distinguishes between configuration data, which can be modified, and operational state data, using the 'config' flag set to 'true' (default) for configurable nodes or 'false' for read-only state.
Containers serve as non-leaf nodes that group related data nodes without imposing a specific value or presence requirement beyond organization. By default, containers are optional and do not require keys for identification, though they may include a 'presence' statement to indicate an explicit semantic meaning when the container is present in the data tree. For example, a container named 'system' might enclose a leaf node for 'host-name' to logically bundle system-level settings.
Lists represent ordered or unordered collections of entries, enabling the modeling of repeatable data sets such as interfaces or users. Uniqueness within a list is enforced by one or more 'key' leafs, specified via the 'key' statement (e.g., 'key "name"'), which identify each entry; without keys, the list functions more like a simple container. Lists support the 'ordered-by user' attribute, allowing client-defined ordering of entries rather than server-imposed sequencing, which is useful for dynamic configurations. An example is a 'user' list keyed by 'name', where each entry contains subnodes like credentials.
Leaf nodes act as terminal points in the hierarchy, holding a single instance of a scalar value defined by a YANG data type, such as string or integer, without any child nodes. In contrast, leaf-lists are terminal nodes that permit multiple instances of the same scalar value type, forming an unordered collection unless specified otherwise, with uniqueness enforced in configuration data to prevent duplicates. For instance, a leaf 'host-name' might store a single device identifier, while a leaf-list 'domain-search' could hold multiple domain names for resolution.
Choice and case statements provide conditional branching in the hierarchy, allowing the selection of one mutually exclusive alternative from a set of options to model scenarios like protocol preferences. A choice defines the alternatives via child case statements, each containing the relevant nodes, and a 'default' statement specifies the preferred case if none is explicitly chosen (e.g., 'default "tcp"'). This ensures the data tree remains valid by enforcing exclusivity; for example, a choice 'proto' might offer cases for TCP or UDP connections, with TCP as the default.

Augmentation and Refinement

In YANG, augmentation provides a mechanism to extend existing data models by adding new schema nodes to a target location in another module's schema tree without modifying the original module. This is achieved using the augment statement, which specifies a target path to a container, list, choice, case, input, output, or notification node, ensuring the original schema's integrity is preserved while allowing modular extensions. For instance, an augmenting module might add a new leaf node, such as a user ID, to a base module's user list only when certain conditions are met, using a when substatement for conditional application.
Groupings in YANG define reusable sets of schema nodes that can be incorporated into data models, promoting consistency and reducing redundancy across modules. The grouping statement encapsulates these nodes, which are then instantiated via the uses statement in a container, list, or other context, effectively copying the grouping's structure into the schema tree. This approach allows developers to define common patterns once and reuse them, with the instantiated nodes behaving as if directly defined in the using module. An example is a grouping for an endpoint that includes IP address and port leaves, which can be used in multiple containers like HTTP server configurations.
Refinement builds on the uses statement by enabling modifications to the properties of nodes inherited from a grouping, such as altering default values, descriptions, or constraints, without affecting the original grouping definition. The refine substatement targets specific nodes within the used grouping and applies changes like setting a new default or adding a must constraint. For example, when using an endpoint grouping, a refinement might adjust the port leaf's default value to 80 for an HTTP context, tailoring the model to specific needs while maintaining reusability. This mechanism enhances flexibility in model customization.
Introduced in YANG 1.1, deviation statements allow implementations, particularly vendor-specific ones, to declare alterations to a standard module's nodes, informing clients of non-standard behavior to support interoperability. The deviation statement in a module targets a node path from an imported module, using substatements like deviate not-supported to indicate a node is unimplemented, deviate add to introduce properties such as defaults, deviate delete to remove constraints, or deviate replace to override attributes like maximum elements. For instance, a vendor might deviate a name-server list to limit its maximum elements to three, documenting hardware constraints without altering the base model. These statements are confined to implementation modules and do not appear in standard IETF modules.

Protocols and Encodings

XML and JSON Representations

YANG data models are serialized into XML format as defined in RFC 6020, where all data nodes such as containers, leafs, and lists are represented as namespace-qualified XML elements using the module's XML namespace URI. Containers are encoded as nested XML elements that group child nodes hierarchically, with flexible ordering unless specified otherwise for RPC inputs or outputs. Leaf nodes appear as XML elements containing only text content that represents their value, encoded according to the node's data type, with no child elements. Lists are encoded as repeated XML elements, where key leafs serve as subelements in a defined order to ensure uniqueness.
For example, a simple container with a leaf might be serialized as:
<system xmlns="http://acme.example.com/system">
 <host-name>example.com</host-name>
</system>
A list entry could appear as:
<users xmlns="http://acme.example.com/system">
 <user>
 <name>admin</name>
 <full-name>Administrator</full-name>
 </user>
</users>

In contrast, JSON encoding of YANG data follows RFC 7951, which defines an object-based structure where the top-level representation is a JSON object, and data nodes are mapped to name-value pairs compliant with I-JSON rules. Containers are encoded as JSON objects under a key matching the container's name, while lists use a key mapping to an array of objects, with list keys unordered within each entry. Leaf-lists are represented as arrays of scalar values under their key, preserving order if the list is user-ordered. Default values for nodes may be omitted in the encoding to reduce verbosity, particularly in protocol contexts, and nodes with no value are excluded unless required.
The 'anyxml' node type is encoded as a name-value pair where the value can be any valid JSON type, such as an object, array, string, number, or boolean. Similarly, 'anydata' nodes are encoded as name-object pairs containing YANG-modeled content that must be I-JSON valid.
An example JSON serialization for the same container might be:
{
 "system": {
 "host-name": "example.com"
 }
}
For a list:
{
 "users": {
 "user": [
 {
 "name": "admin",
 "full-name": "Administrator"
 }
 ]
 }
}

Mapping rules ensure consistency across encodings: nodes marked with 'config false' in YANG models, which represent operational state data rather than configuration, are included in XML or JSON instances for state queries in the same structural manner as configuration nodes. XPath expressions defined in YANG models (e.g., for 'when' or 'must' statements) guide node selections during serialization, but the encodings themselves adhere to canonical forms for data types to maintain interoperability, such as prohibiting leading zeros in numerical representations.
XML and JSON representations differ in structure and compactness: XML explicitly preserves element order (critical for user-ordered lists) and requires namespace declarations on elements, making it suitable for detailed, schema-validated exchanges, while JSON is more compact, omits explicit namespaces and order for non-ordered keys, and favors API-friendly readability without verbose tags. These formats briefly reference YANG's hierarchical structures but focus on serialization without altering the underlying model tree.

Integration with NETCONF and RESTCONF

YANG serves as the data modeling language for both NETCONF and RESTCONF protocols, enabling the structured transport and manipulation of configuration and state data across network devices. NETCONF, defined in RFC 6241, provides a session-based mechanism for installing, manipulating, and deleting the configuration of network devices using XML-encoded messages over secure transports. RESTCONF, specified in RFC 8040, extends this capability by mapping YANG data models to a RESTful interface using HTTP, allowing clients to interact with the same YANG-defined resources via standard web methods. This integration ensures that YANG models define not only the data structure but also the operations for querying and modifying it, promoting interoperability in network management.
In NETCONF, core operations such as , , and leverage YANG to retrieve and modify data. The operation fetches all or a subset of configuration data from a specified datastore, such as the running or candidate configuration, using YANG filters that support subtree selection or XPath expressions if the :xpath capability is advertised by the server. Similarly, the operation retrieves both configuration and operational state data, applying the same filtering mechanisms to limit responses to relevant YANG nodes. The operation enables configuration changes through actions like merge, replace, create, delete, or remove, where the payload consists of YANG-modeled XML data targeted at specific datastores. Additionally, YANG allows the definition of custom RPCs, which are remote procedure calls encapsulated in elements, enabling vendor-specific or standardized actions beyond the base NETCONF operations. These RPCs are invoked similarly to standard operations, with responses in elements, ensuring that YANG models can extend protocol functionality seamlessly.
RESTCONF maps the YANG data hierarchy directly to HTTP resources, facilitating CRUD operations through familiar web conventions. URI paths are constructed from the YANG module namespace and node hierarchy, such as /restconf/data/ietf-interfaces:interfaces/interface=eth0, where module names are prefixed and list keys are appended for instance identification. HTTP methods align with data manipulation: GET retrieves resource representations, POST creates new entries or invokes actions, PUT replaces entire resources, PATCH performs targeted updates, and DELETE removes resources, all using YANG-derived content in XML or JSON formats. Query parameters enhance selectivity, including 'fields' for specifying subtrees via a YANG-like path expression, 'filter' for XPath-based conditions, and 'depth' to limit the response hierarchy, allowing clients to request precise subsets of YANG data without full datastore traversal.
Notifications and subscriptions in YANG integrate with both protocols to support event-driven management. YANG-Push, outlined in RFC 8641, enables dynamic subscriptions for datastore updates, allowing clients to receive periodic or on-change notifications filtered by YANG XPath or subtree selectors. In NETCONF, these are delivered via event streams as defined in RFC 5277, where subscriptions are established through RPCs like establish-subscription, and updates arrive as elements containing YANG-modeled data. RESTCONF supports similar subscriptions through POST requests to /restconf/data/ietf-subscribed-notifications:subscriptions, with notifications streamed over HTTP using Server-Sent Events or similar mechanisms, ensuring real-time updates aligned with YANG models. This approach replaces polling with efficient, model-driven push mechanisms for monitoring changes.
Security in YANG's integration with these protocols combines transport-layer protections with model-specific controls. NETCONF mandates secure transports like SSH for authentication, integrity, and confidentiality, as specified in RFC 6242, preventing unauthorized access to sensitive configuration data. RESTCONF requires TLS with HTTPS, including certificate-based client authentication and server identity verification per RFC 5280, to safeguard against eavesdropping and injection attacks. At the YANG level, the Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM) in RFC 8341 provides fine-grained permissions, defining rules for RPCs, data nodes, and notifications using groups and CRUDX operations, integrated into both protocols to enforce role-based access without altering the underlying transports.

Standards and Usage

IETF Specifications

The IETF standardized YANG primarily through the NETMOD Working Group, with core specifications focusing on the language syntax, semantics, common elements, and integration with management protocols. These documents are all on the Standards Track unless otherwise noted, ensuring interoperability for network data modeling.
The initial version of the YANG language, version 1.0, is defined in RFC 6020, published in October 2010, which specifies a data modeling language for defining configuration and state data, remote procedure calls (RPCs), and notifications manipulated by the Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF). This RFC outlines the hierarchical structure of data models using modules and submodules, built-in and derived data types, constraints such as "must" statements and uniqueness, and mechanisms for extensibility like augmentations and groupings. RFC 6021, also published in October 2010, complements this by introducing common data types in the "ietf-yang-types" and "ietf-inet-types" modules, including types like counter64, ip-address, and uri, to promote reuse across YANG models. These types address general management needs, such as counters for performance metrics and address formats for networking.
YANG 1.1, defined in RFC 7950 and published in August 2016, serves as the current maintenance release of the language, obsoleting RFC 6020 and clarifying ambiguities while introducing enhancements like the "anydata" node for unknown structured data, "action" statements for context-specific operations, and refined XPath support for path expressions. It maintains backward compatibility in most cases but includes minor changes, such as updated semantics for union types and improved handling of deviations. An update to the common data types appears in RFC 6991, published in July 2013, which obsoletes RFC 6021 and adds types like hex-string and bits for broader applicability in modern network models.
Architectural documents provide guidance on YANG usage and representation. RFC 8199, published in July 2017 and on the Informational track, establishes terminology and concepts for classifying YANG modules by abstraction layers (e.g., network services vs. network elements) and origins (e.g., standards-based vs. vendor-specific), aiding in the organization and analysis of data modeling efforts. Similarly, RFC 8340, published in March 2018 as a Best Current Practice, standardizes the notation for YANG tree diagrams, using symbols like "+--" for nodes and flags (e.g., "rw" for read-write configuration) to visually represent module schemas, augmentations, RPCs, and notifications in specifications.
Protocol integration specifications tie YANG to operational protocols. RFC 6241, published in June 2011, defines the NETCONF protocol version 1.1, an XML-based mechanism for installing, manipulating, and deleting configuration data on network devices, with YANG serving as the canonical modeling language for its content layer and operations like get-config and edit-config. RFC 8040, published in January 2017, introduces RESTCONF, a RESTful HTTP-based protocol that exposes YANG-modeled data via methods like GET, POST, and PATCH, supporting both XML and JSON encodings while aligning with NETCONF datastore concepts for configuration and state retrieval. For notifications, YANG's core support is embedded in RFC 7950, but RFC 8528, published in March 2019, extends this architecturally through the YANG Schema Mount mechanism, allowing mounted modules to include notifications and RPCs at runtime-defined points in a parent schema tree.
Since 2019, the IETF has continued to advance YANG with additional specifications enhancing functionality and integration. Key examples include RFC 8525 (March 2019), which defines a YANG Library for querying supported modules and datastores; RFC 8639 (June 2020), introducing subscriber-specific subscriptions to event streams; and more recent publications as of 2025, such as RFC 9702 (January 2025) for Maximum Segment Identifier Depth types in MPLS, RFC 9826 (September 2025) for Path Computation Element Communication Protocol, and RFC 9833 (September 2025) for attachment circuits.
Errata and clarifications for YANG 1.1 are tracked via the RFC Editor's process rather than a dedicated update RFC, with ongoing maintenance occurring through working group drafts that incorporate fixes into future revisions. These specifications collectively form the foundation for YANG's use in IETF standards-track data models, emphasizing modularity, extensibility, and protocol-agnostic modeling.

Data Models and Best Practices

YANG data models provide standardized schemas for representing network configurations and states, enabling consistent management across devices. The IETF has defined core models such as the ietf-interfaces module in RFC 8343, which supports the management of network interfaces including configuration, operational state, and statistics for common interface types like Ethernet and VLANs. Complementing this, the ietf-ip module in RFC 8344 extends interface management to IP configurations, covering IPv4 and IPv6 addressing, neighbor discovery, and routing parameters to facilitate IP-level operations. More recent examples include the ietf-network-instances module in RFC 8529 (March 2019) for managing virtual resource partitioning like VRFs, and the IOAM (In Situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance) model in RFC 9617 (August 2024) for configuring IOAM capabilities. As a community-driven extension, OpenConfig offers vendor-neutral YANG models that build on IETF standards, focusing on operational needs for multi-vendor environments with modules for interfaces, BGP, and system monitoring to enhance interoperability.
Best practices for YANG modeling are outlined in RFC 8407, which provides guidelines for authors and reviewers to ensure clarity, consistency, and compliance with YANG 1.1 semantics. Naming conventions emphasize unique module names prefixed with "ietf-" for normative modules, using lowercase letters and hyphens for identifiers limited to 1-64 characters to promote readability and avoid conflicts. For extensibility, the guidelines recommend using "identityref" types for extensible enumerations under a single naming authority and avoiding intra-module augmentations in favor of inline definitions to maintain schema integrity. To prevent circular imports, modular design principles advise clear dependency hierarchies with separate modules for reusable groupings and types, minimizing top-level nodes and ensuring imports reference specific revisions. Feature statements are highlighted for optional capabilities, requiring "if-feature" conditions to express dependencies and detailed descriptions of interactions to support conditional implementations without breaking core functionality.
Multi-vendor environments pose interoperability challenges due to deviations in proprietary extensions, where vendors adapt IETF models differently, leading to schema mismatches in SDN management scenarios. To address these, recommendations include using validation tools like pyang for syntax checking and transformation, and yanglint for semantic verification and constraint enforcement to detect deviations early.
Documentation via "description" statements provides semantic explanations for nodes and features to aid interoperability, while "reference" statements link to external specifications for precise semantics, ensuring models remain maintainable and understandable.

Implementations

Open-Source Tools

Several open-source tools facilitate the development, validation, and management of YANG data models, enabling developers to work with the language without proprietary dependencies. These tools range from command-line utilities for compilation and validation to libraries for programmatic integration and web-based editors for visualization, addressing key needs in network automation and configuration management. Prominent examples include Pyang, Yangson, and Libyang, each offering distinct capabilities tailored to different aspects of YANG processing.
Pyang is a versatile, open-source command-line tool designed for validating YANG modules and compiling them into various formats. It supports both YANG 1.0 and 1.1 revisions, performing syntax checks, semantic validation, and dependency resolution across modules. Key features include generating output in XML, JSON, and DOT (for Graphviz visualization of module hierarchies), as well as support for extensions that allow custom backends for additional output formats like tree diagrams or code skeletons. Developed and maintained by the YANG community, Pyang is widely used in development workflows for ensuring model correctness before deployment.
Yangson serves as a specialized JSON-based validator for YANG schemas, emphasizing efficiency in handling RESTCONF-compliant data models. It provides robust validation of JSON instances against YANG schemas, including support for features like deviations, augmentations, and conditional statements, while optimizing memory usage for large-scale models common in enterprise networks. Yangson excels in scenarios requiring high-performance parsing and error reporting, making it suitable for automated testing pipelines and integration with CI/CD systems. Its design prioritizes RESTCONF interoperability, allowing seamless validation of API payloads.
Libyang is a lightweight C library that implements core YANG functionalities, including parsing, validation, and serialization of models in both XML and JSON formats. It offers comprehensive support for YANG 1.0 and 1.1, handling features such as schema mounting, feature detection, and printing in human-readable tree formats. The library includes language bindings for Python (via libyang-py) and Java, facilitating its use in diverse programming environments. Libyang is notably integrated into open-source networking projects like FRR (Free Range Routing), where it powers YANG-based configuration management for routing protocols. Its modular architecture allows embedding in larger applications for runtime model processing. As of 2025, Libyang version 2.x includes enhancements for 5G-A compatibility, such as improved handling of large-scale telemetry data.
Beyond these core libraries, additional open-source resources support YANG ecosystem accessibility. ConfD Basic provides a free tier of the ConfD toolkit, offering YANG parsing, validation, and basic NETCONF/RESTCONF server simulation for non-commercial use, with limitations on concurrent sessions. YANG Suite is a web-based editor and validator built with modern JavaScript frameworks, enabling visual module editing, dependency graphing, and interactive validation directly in a browser environment. For model discovery and sharing, repositories like yangcatalog.org host thousands of validated YANG modules on GitHub, serving as a centralized, community-curated archive for standards-based and vendor models, complete with search and download capabilities.

Commercial and Vendor-Specific Solutions

Cisco Network Services Orchestrator (NSO) provides comprehensive YANG support for modeling network services, enabling the definition of hierarchical schemas in its Configuration Database (CDB) to manage intent and state data across multi-vendor environments. NSO integrates YANG models with NETCONF and RESTCONF protocols to facilitate automated configuration and orchestration, supporting over 100 device types including Cisco, Huawei, and Nokia platforms for large-scale network automation in service provider and enterprise deployments.
Juniper Networks' Junos OS incorporates native YANG modules to model configuration hierarchies, operational commands, and state data for routing and switching functions, ensuring compatibility with standards-based management while extending support for proprietary features through YANG deviations and custom types. The Junos PyEZ Python library enables programmatic access to these YANG models via NETCONF, allowing developers to retrieve, configure, and automate Junos devices in enterprise networks with support for both standard and custom schemas.
Huawei devices, such as the NetEngine series, utilize vendor-specific YANG modules to support configuration and state data modeling for 5G and edge computing scenarios, integrating with NETCONF for automated management of high-bandwidth transport networks. These modules enable precise control over 5G RAN-core connectivity.
Nokia's Service Router Operating System (SR OS) employs proprietary YANG data models for model-driven management, covering configuration, state, and telemetry in edge computing and IP routing applications, with support for NETCONF to enable programmable automation across multi-terabit interconnects. Nokia provides commercial simulation tools within its Network Services Platform to test and optimize YANG modules for edge scenarios, facilitating deployment in 5G and cloud-edge environments.
Recent developments highlight increased adoption of YANG in cloud-native architectures, such as Kubernetes operators for NETCONF-based network function configuration since 2022, enhancing automation in hybrid enterprise setups. Enterprise solutions increasingly emphasize YANG security extensions, including module-specific considerations for access control and data validation to mitigate risks in commercial deployments. Coverage of AI-optimized YANG tools remains limited, though integrations like AI-centric network orchestration are emerging for performance in 5G-A environments as of March 2025. As of November 2025, additional integrations with eBPF for YANG-based performance monitoring in cloud-native setups have gained traction in open-source projects.

References

RFC 7950 - The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language

RFC 6020 - YANG - A Data Modeling Language for the Network ...

RFC 8040 - RESTCONF Protocol - IETF Datatracker

RFC 6643 - Translation of Structure of Management Information ...

RFC 6241 - Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)

RFC 8641 - Subscription to YANG Notifications for Datastore Updates

An Architecture for Network Management Using NETCONF and YANG

RFC 6020: YANG - A Data Modeling Language for the Network ...

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-16

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-7.1.9

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-netmod-yang/00/

RFC 6021 - Common YANG Data Types - IETF Datatracker

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.2

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.3

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.4

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.5

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.6

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.9

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.10

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-9.13

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.3

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.5.3

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.6.5

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.7.5

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.7.6

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.6.4

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.7.4

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-6

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.5

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.8

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.8.2

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.6

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.7

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.9

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.17

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.12

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.13

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.13.2

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7950#section-7.20.3

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-7

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-7.5

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-7.6

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-7.8

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-3

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-5.2

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-5.3

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-4

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-5.6

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-5.5

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-5

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-7.1

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6020#section-9.3

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7951.html#section-1

RFC 6991 - Common YANG Data Types - IETF Datatracker

RFC 8199 - YANG Module Classification - IETF Datatracker

RFC 8340: YANG Tree Diagrams

RFC 8528: YANG Schema Mount

RFC 8343 - A YANG Data Model for Interface Management

RFC 8344 - A YANG Data Model for IP Management

Data models - OpenConfig

RFC 8407 - Guidelines for Authors and Reviewers of Documents ...

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8407#section-4.1

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8407#section-4.11.1

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8407#section-4.13

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8407#section-4.17

 Multi-Vendor NETCONF/YANG-Based SDN Management ... - EANTC

Tools for YANG | - IEEE 802.1

 Achieving Scalable YANG Modules in PON Access - IEEE 802

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8407#section-4.14

YANG | Cisco Crosswork NSO Documentation

NSO at a Glance | Cisco Crosswork NSO Documentation

Device types supported by Cisco NSO NEDs

Understanding Junos YANG Modules | Junos OS - Juniper Networks

Understanding YANG on Devices Running Junos OS

Understanding Junos PyEZ - Juniper Networks

Use Junos PyEZ to Retrieve a Configuration - Juniper Networks

YANG Model - NetEngine 8000 - Huawei Support

What Is YANG? - Huawei Technical Support

NETCONF Configuration - NetEngine 8000 F1A ...

Nokia SR OS YANG data models

Model-driven management | Nokia.com

Network Services Platform | Nokia

GitOps and Kubernetes Operator-based Network Function ...

YANG module security considerations | IETF Community Wiki

Huawei's Yang Chaobin: AI-Centric Network Solution Helps Carriers ...
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion