Zero flag Grokipedia
 

 Fact-checked by Grok 2 months ago 
Zero flag
 Ara Eve Leo Sal 
1x
 The zero flag, commonly abbreviated as ZF or Z, is a single-bit indicator in the flags register (also known as the status register or program status word) of many central processing unit (CPU) architectures that signals whether the result of the preceding arithmetic, logical, or comparison operation equals zero. It is typically set to 1 (asserted) when the operation yields a zero result and cleared to 0 (deasserted) otherwise, providing essential feedback for control flow decisions in low-level programming. This flag is a core component of processor design in architectures such as x86 and ARM, where it facilitates efficient equality testing without additional explicit checks.
In practice, the zero flag is updated by instructions like subtraction, addition, bitwise operations, or dedicated comparison instructions (e.g., CMP in x86 or CMP in ARM), which compute differences or perform tests that implicitly evaluate to zero for equal operands. For instance, in x86 assembly, a CMP instruction sets ZF=1 if the two operands are equal, allowing subsequent conditional jumps such as JZ (jump if zero) or JNE (jump if not equal) to branch based on the flag's state. Similarly, in ARM, the Z flag enables conditional execution suffixes like EQ (equal) or NE (not equal) on instructions, optimizing code by avoiding unnecessary branches and supporting predicated execution. This mechanism is crucial for implementing loops, equality validations, and error checks in assembly language and compiler-generated code, enhancing performance in resource-constrained environments.
While ubiquitous in CISC and RISC designs like x86, 8085, and ARM, the zero flag is not universal across all processor architectures; for example, MIPS omits a dedicated flags register and instead relies on direct register comparisons or the hardwired zero register ($0) for zero-detection in branch instructions. Its presence underscores a key trade-off in CPU design between explicit flag-based control and register-centric simplicity, influencing instruction encoding efficiency and branch prediction.

Definition and Operation

Core Concept

The zero flag, commonly abbreviated as ZF, is a single-bit indicator within a processor's status or flags register that signals whether the outcome of an arithmetic, logical, or comparison operation is exactly zero. It is set to 1 (true) when all bits of the result are 0, and cleared to 0 (false) otherwise. This binary nature allows the flag to represent a precise condition without storing the full result value.
The primary purpose of the zero flag is to facilitate efficient runtime decisions in program execution, such as identifying equality between two values (e.g., via subtraction yielding zero) or detecting end-of-loop conditions, thereby avoiding the need for extra explicit checks that would consume additional cycles. In processor designs, it integrates seamlessly with conditional instructions to optimize control flow based on operation outcomes.
In binary terms, the zero flag occupies a specific bit position in the flags register, which differs by architecture; for example, it is bit 6 in the x86 EFLAGS or RFLAGS register. To illustrate, consider a subtraction like 5 - 5, resulting in 0, which sets the zero flag to 1; in contrast, 5 + 1 yields 6, clearing the flag to 0.

Setting and Clearing Mechanisms

The zero flag (ZF) is set to 1 when the entire result of an operation is exactly zero, following any necessary truncation or masking to the target operand size, and regardless of whether the operands are of varying bit widths such as 8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit, or 64-bit. This condition ensures that ZF accurately reflects the numerical outcome as zero across the full precision of the result.
Conversely, ZF is cleared to 0 whenever the result is non-zero, encompassing positive values, negative values in two's complement representation, or scenarios involving overflows that produce a non-zero outcome. Overflows themselves do not directly influence ZF; instead, the flag's state depends solely on whether the final computed value equals zero.
This mechanism applies to a range of operations, including arithmetic instructions such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division; logical operations like bitwise AND, OR, XOR, and NOT; shift operations; and comparison operations that evaluate equality without storing the result. In all cases, ZF updates based on the post-operation result to facilitate subsequent conditional logic.
For multi-byte results, ZF is set only if all bytes of the result are zero, ensuring the flag captures the complete zero state across the operand's width. The behavior remains consistent for both unsigned and signed operations that yield zero, as ZF evaluates the bit pattern numerically without regard to interpretive signedness.
The algorithmic logic for toggling ZF can be expressed in pseudocode as follows:
After performing operation OP on operands to produce result:
if (result == 0) {
 ZF = 1;
} else {
 ZF = 0;
}
 This simple conditional check underpins ZF's utility in detecting equality, such as in comparisons for conditional branching.

Architectural Implementations

x86 and Compatible Processors

In the x86 architecture, the zero flag (ZF) resides at bit 6 of the 16-bit FLAGS register, the 32-bit EFLAGS register, and the 64-bit RFLAGS register, where it serves as a status indicator updated by various instructions to reflect computational outcomes. This positioning has been uniform across compatibility modes, with the upper bits of EFLAGS and RFLAGS reserved to maintain legacy support.
The ZF evaluates the entire operand width without partial considerations, setting to 1 only if the full resultfor instance, the 8-bit value in AL, 16-bit in AX, 32-bit in EAX, or 64-bit in RAXis zero, ensuring that sub-register modifications do not independently trigger flag changes. Arithmetic operations such as ADD, SUB, and CMP set ZF based on the destination register or accumulator becoming zero, while comparison instructions like CMP specifically set it upon operand equality. Logical instructions including TEST, AND, OR, and XOR explicitly set ZF if their bitwise result across the operand width is zero, providing a mechanism for detecting null states without altering memory. In contrast, MUL and DIV affect ZF based on the accumulator or destination in legacy documentation, though modern implementations treat it as undefined to prioritize performance in multi-word results.
Extensions like SSE and AVX integrate ZF into vector processing, where instructions such as PTEST set it to 1 if the bitwise AND of two XMM or YMM registers yields all zeros, enabling checks for fully zeroed vector elements in certain modes. Scalar floating-point compares like COMISS and UCOMISS similarly set ZF upon equality, extending zero-detection to SIMD contexts while preserving compatibility with integer operations.
This ZF behavior originated with the Intel 8086 in 1978 and has remained consistent through x86-64 evolutions by Intel and AMD, supporting seamless transitions across 16-, 32-, and 64-bit environments without architectural disruptions.

ARM and RISC Architectures

In ARM architectures, the zero flag is integrated into the condition code registers to support efficient RISC operations. In the 32-bit AArch32 execution state, it forms part of the Current Program Status Register (CPSR), a 32-bit register where the Z bit at position 30 is set to 1 if the result of the last flag-setting instruction equals zero, and cleared to 0 otherwise. This design allows the zero flag to indicate equality or null results from arithmetic and logical operations. In the 64-bit AArch64 state, the condition flags, including the zero flag, are consolidated into a dedicated 4-bit NZCV register for improved clarity and accessibility, with the Z bit maintaining the same semantic role based on 64-bit result widths.
The zero flag is updated by specific data processing instructions, enhancing conditional control flow in RISC pipelines. Instructions such as ADD, SUB, and the dedicated CMP update the Z flag when suffixed with 'S' to indicate flag modification; for instance, CMP sets Z to 1 if the two operands are equal (resulting in zero difference). These updates enable widespread conditional execution, where nearly all instructions can be predicated on flag statese.g., ADDEQ performs addition only if Z is 1, allowing equality-based branches without explicit jumps and reducing branch misprediction overhead. In vector extensions, this behavior extends to SIMD operations: NEON instructions use predicate registers for lane-wise control, while SVE (Scalable Vector Extension) instructions can set the Z flag via predicate tests, such as when all lanes in a vector are zero (inactive), supporting scalable parallelism across varying vector lengths.
ARM's handling of the zero flag emphasizes power efficiency through optional updates, aligning with RISC principles of simplicity and minimalism. The 'S' suffix on instructions allows selective flag updates, avoiding computations when flags are not needed for subsequent conditionals, which conserves energy in battery-constrained embedded and mobile systems by minimizing unnecessary register writes and pipeline stalls. In variants like Thumb mode, which compresses instructions for code density in resource-limited environments, the zero flag's behavior remains preserved within the CPSR, with conditionals managed via IT (If-Then) blocks in Thumb-2 to maintain compatibility and efficiency. This contrasts briefly with x86's more rigid always-updated flags, highlighting ARM's flexible model for low-power RISC designs.

Legacy and Other Processors

In legacy processors such as the MOS Technology 6502, the zero flag (Z) resides in the 8-bit processor status register and is set to 1 if the result of an arithmetic, logical, load, or transfer operation equals zero, otherwise cleared to 0. This flag supports conditional branching instructions like BEQ (branch if equal, i.e., zero) and BNE (branch if not equal), enabling efficient control flow decisions in resource-constrained 8-bit systems such as early home computers and game consoles. The 6502's implementation emphasizes simplicity, with the Z flag updated by arithmetic, logical, load, and transfer instructions based on the result or transferred value.
The PDP-11 minicomputer family, influential in early Unix development, incorporates the zero flag as bit 2 (Z) in the 16-bit processor status word (PSW), set when the result of an operation is zero and used alongside negative (N), overflow (V), and carry (C) flags for condition testing. Instructions such as TST (test) explicitly set the Z flag by comparing the operand to zero without altering it, facilitating branches like BEQ and BNE that check for equality or inequality. This design influenced subsequent CISC architectures by providing a compact mechanism for signed and unsigned comparisons in multitasking environments.
Similarly, the VAX architecture from Digital Equipment Corporation features the zero flag (Z) as bit 2 in the processor status longword (PSL), activated when an arithmetic or logical result is zero, integrated with N, V, and C for comprehensive condition code evaluation. VAX instructions like CMPL (compare longword) update the Z flag to support branches such as BEQ, enabling virtual memory and multiprocessing applications to handle equality checks efficiently across 32-bit operations.
The Motorola 68000 series, a cornerstone of 1980s workstations and early personal computers, includes the zero flag (Z) in the 16-bit status register, set to 1 for zero results from ALU operations and cleared otherwise, often in conjunction with extend (X), negative (N), overflow (V), and carry (C) bits. For instance, the CMP (compare) instruction computes the difference without storing it but sets the Z flag if equal to zero, allowing branches like BEQ to optimize code in systems like the Macintosh and Amiga. This flag's behavior ensures consistent handling of byte, word, and longword sizes, promoting portability in mixed-mode environments.
Among other processors, the MIPS RISC architecture eschews a dedicated zero flag in favor of register-based zero detection, with the hardwired $zero register (r0) always holding 0 to facilitate comparisons via instructions like BEQ (branch if equal to zero) or BNE. This design reduces hardware complexity by avoiding a flags register, relying instead on immediate result testing in the pipeline, which enhances performance in embedded and high-performance computing applications.
The RISC-V instruction set architecture similarly lacks a dedicated zero flag or condition codes register, following a minimalist RISC design. It uses direct conditional branch instructions such as BEQ (branch if equal) and BNE (branch if not equal) that compare two registers, with the hardwired zero register x0 enabling efficient zero checks (e.g., BEQ rs, x0, label to branch if rs is zero). This approach, ratified in its base form in 2010 and extended through ongoing specifications as of 2025, promotes simplicity and extensibility in open-source implementations for embedded systems, AI accelerators, and general-purpose computing.
SPARC processors implement the zero condition code (Z) within the integer condition codes (ICC) of the 32-bit processor state register (PSR), set to 1 if an ALU result is zero and used for conditional branches like BNE (branch on not equal, i.e., Z=0). Instructions such as ADDcc (add with condition codes) update the ICC, including Z, to support scalable parallelism in workstation and server environments, with the flag cleared for non-zero results to enable precise control flow.
In PowerPC architectures, zero detection occurs via the equal (EQ) bit in the condition register (CR), a 32-bit structure divided into eight 4-bit fields (CR0CR7), where integer operations typically update CR0's EQ to 1 if the result is zero. Branches like BEQ (branch if equal) test this bit, allowing flexible condition evaluation without a monolithic flags register, which aids in vector processing and superscalar execution in systems like IBM's RS/6000. The CR's design permits multiple outstanding conditions, improving instruction-level parallelism over traditional single-flag approaches.

Programming Applications

Conditional Branching and Control Flow

The zero flag (ZF) plays a pivotal role in conditional branching by enabling processors to alter program execution flow based on whether the result of a prior operation equals zero. In x86 architectures, instructions such as JZ (Jump if Zero) and JNZ (Jump if Not Zero) directly test the ZF to decide whether to branch to a specified label. For instance, JZ branches if ZF is set (indicating a zero result), while JNZ branches if ZF is clear (non-zero result). Similarly, in ARM architectures, the BEQ (Branch if Equal) instruction branches when the Z flag is set following a comparison, and BNE (Branch if Not Equal) branches when the Z flag is clear; these leverage the Z flag in the Application Program Status Register (APSR). In MIPS, while there is no explicit ZF, the BEQ and BNE instructions implicitly test for zero by comparing two registers and branching if their difference is zero or non-zero, respectively, achieving analogous control flow without a dedicated flags register. This mechanism allows efficient decision-making in assembly code, where the flag's state reflects the outcome of arithmetic or logical operations without requiring redundant computations.
ZF is instrumental in loop control, particularly for termination conditions where a counter or accumulator is decremented until it reaches zero. For example, a loop might repeatedly subtract 1 from a register until the result sets ZF, triggering an exit branch; this avoids explicit counter comparisons and minimizes instruction overhead. In equality testing, a CMP (compare) instruction sets ZF based on the difference between two valuessuch as registers, memory locations, or constantsfollowed by a JZ to branch if they match, enabling string or pointer comparisons without temporary storage for results. An illustrative x86 assembly snippet for equality testing is:
CMP AX, BX
JZ equal_label
Here, if AX equals BX, ZF is set, and execution jumps to equal_label. This approach is common in low-level optimizations for tasks like null pointer checks or buffer scans.
The use of ZF in branching offers significant performance benefits, as flag checks typically execute in a single cycle, contrasting with multi-instruction sequences for direct comparisons that could stall the pipeline. In modern CPUs, ZF-based branches integrate seamlessly with branch prediction and speculative execution, reducing misprediction penalties and improving instruction throughput; for instance, pipelined designs can resolve ZF conditions early in the execution stage, minimizing latency in control flow decisions. These efficiencies are particularly evident in high-frequency loops and conditional code paths, where flag-dependent branching outperforms flagless alternatives by avoiding data dependencies and extra ALU operations.

Arithmetic and Logical Operations

In processor architectures, arithmetic operations such as addition and subtraction set the zero flag when the result of the computation is exactly zero, regardless of borrow or carry conditions. In x86, the ADD instruction computes the sum of two operands and sets the zero flag to 1 if that sum equals zero; similarly, the SUB instruction sets the zero flag to 1 if the difference between operands is zero. In ARM, the flag-setting variants ADDS and SUBS set the Z flag to 1 if the result equals zero. Multiplication and division instructions in x86 (MUL, IMUL, DIV, IDIV) do not update the zero flag based on their results; the ZF is undefined after these operations, requiring separate instructions for zero checks if needed.
Logical operations influence the zero flag by evaluating the bitwise result of the computation. The AND instruction sets the zero flag to 1 if all bits in the result are cleared (i.e., the result is zero), commonly used in masking scenarios where testing against a mask clears specific bits. The XOR operation sets the zero flag to 1 when the operands are identical, as their bitwise exclusive-or yields zero; conversely, the OR instruction sets the flag if the bitwise union of operands results in zero. The TEST instruction, which performs an AND without storing the result, isolates the zero flag to check if the AND outcome is zero, often for null or mask validation.
Shift and rotate instructions set the zero flag based on whether the shifted or rotated result equals zero. For example, logical shifts like SHL (shift left) or SHR (shift right) set the flag to 1 if the operation shifts all bits out, leaving the result as zero; arithmetic shifts like SAR (shift arithmetic right) follow the same rule, setting the flag if the sign-extended result is zero, which can occur after repeated shifts that eliminate non-zero bits.
Comparison operations are designed to generate flags without altering operands, focusing on the zero flag for equality checks. The CMP instruction performs a subtraction (without storing the result) and sets the zero flag to 1 if the operands are equal; likewise, the TEST instruction (AND without store) sets the flag for bitwise equivalence to zero. These operations enable efficient isolation of the zero flag for detecting equality or null states.
Common patterns emerge in zero flag usage across these operations: a zero result from subtraction (as in CMP or SUB) indicates operand equality, while a zero XOR result signals identical values, often leveraged for data comparison without explicit branching. In masking with AND or TEST, the zero flag confirms all targeted bits are cleared, and shifts producing zero detect empty or fully shifted-out values.

Historical Development

Origins in Early Processors

The zero flag's conceptual foundations trace back to minicomputer architectures of the late 1960s, where condition codes facilitated efficient assembly language programming by capturing operation results without additional instructions. A notable predecessor is the PDP-11, introduced by Digital Equipment Corporation in 1969, which included a zero condition code (Z) in its processor status word to indicate when an arithmetic or logical operation yielded a result of zero, enabling streamlined comparisons and branches in resource-limited systems. This design influenced subsequent microprocessor flag registers by prioritizing compact status tracking for control flow decisions.
The zero flag first appeared in microprocessors with the Intel 8008, released in April 1972 as an 8-bit CPU with a 4-bit status register that included the Z flag, set when the accumulator or register result was zero following arithmetic, logical, or data transfer operations. This innovation built directly on minicomputer precedents like the PDP-11, adapting them for the emerging era of single-chip processors to support zero detection in accumulator-based computations, a common paradigm in early embedded and personal computing applications. The successor Intel 8080, released in April 1974, retained and expanded this with a 5-bit status register including the Z flag.
Standardization and expansion followed in the mid-1970s. The Intel 8085, introduced in 1976 as an enhanced 8-bit successor to the 8080, retained the Z flag in its flag register, maintaining compatibility while adding power-saving features for broader industrial use. By 1978, the Intel 8086 extended this to 16-bit operations, incorporating ZF in a 16-bit flags register to handle wider data paths, thus enabling zero checks across registers and memory for more complex programs.
The primary motivation for including the zero flag in these early designs was to minimize instruction counts in memory-constrained environments, allowing programmers to implement loops, equality tests, and end-of-data detections with single-branch instructions rather than multi-step comparisons. For instance, in resource-limited systems like those running on 4-64 KB of RAM, this reduced code size and execution time for frequent operations such as scanning buffers or validating results. A key milestone in its practical impact was its role in early operating systems like CP/M (1974), where 8080 assembly code leveraged the Z flag for efficient file and string handling, such as detecting null terminators in filenames or directory entries during disk I/O routines.

Evolution Across Generations

In the 16-bit and 32-bit eras of x86 processors, the zero flag (ZF) remained fundamentally unchanged from its origins, serving as bit 6 in the FLAGS register, set to 1 when arithmetic or logical results equaled zero and cleared otherwise. The Intel 80286, introduced in 1982, extended this behavior to protected mode, where ZF supported conditional branching and privilege checks without alteration to its core definition, though it integrated with segment descriptor validation instructions like LAR (Load Access Rights), which set ZF to indicate accessible descriptors based on current privilege level (CPL) versus descriptor privilege level (DPL). The subsequent Intel 80386, released in 1985, expanded to 32-bit operations in protected mode, preserving ZF's role while incorporating it into interrupt handling: during exceptions or interrupts, the EFLAGS register (including ZF) is pushed onto the stack for preservation, allowing handlers to evaluate pre-interrupt conditions such as equality from prior comparisons, with restoration via IRET to maintain program flow. This integration enabled ZF to influence task switches and virtual-8086 mode transitions, where it tested results in string operations (e.g., CMPS with REPE prefix terminating on ZF=1 for equality).
The transition to 64-bit architectures extended ZF without modification to its semantics, adapting it to wider registers for enhanced scalability. In AMD64 (x86-64), introduced with the AMD Opteron in 2003, ZF resides unchanged as bit 6 in the 64-bit RFLAGS register, supporting the same arithmetic and logical operations across 64-bit operands while integrating with legacy modes for backward compatibility. Similarly, ARMv8 (2011) refined the zero condition flag (Z) within the NZCV register for AArch64 execution state, where it is set to 1 if the result of flag-setting instructions (e.g., CMP or ADD) on 64-bit registers equals zero, providing explicit support for wider integer and floating-point comparisons in a RISC condition code model that avoids implicit flag dependencies.
Vector and SIMD extensions introduced mechanisms for element-wise zero detection, augmenting the scalar ZF with parallel processing capabilities. Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE), launched with Intel Pentium III in 1999, utilized the MXCSR register to manage floating-point status, including the denormals-are-zero (DAZ) control bit (bit 6) that treats subnormal numbers as zero for operations and the zero exception flag (ZE, bit 2) that signals divide-by-zero events across vector lanes, enabling per-element handling in 128-bit XMM registers without altering the core ZF. Advanced Vector Extensions 512 (AVX-512), introduced in 2016 with Intel Xeon Phi, enhanced this via eight mask registers (k0-k7), where the zeroing-masking behavior (controlled by a writemask policy) conditionally zeros non-masked vector elements in 512-bit ZMM registers during operations like VADDPS, effectively performing masked zero checks for conditional execution and reducing branching overhead in high-performance computing.
RISC architectures influenced ZF adaptations by favoring implicit result encoding over dedicated flags, promoting efficiency in pipelined designs. The MIPS R4000 (1991) implemented comparison via SLT (Set on Less Than), which sets the destination register to 1 if the signed source is less than the target (else 0), providing an implicit zero result for equality tests without affecting any flags, a design choice that streamlined 64-bit integer pipelines by avoiding flag interlocks. In the PowerPC G5 (IBM PowerPC 970, 2003), AltiVec vector extensions integrated zero detection into the condition register (CR) fields through instructions like VCMPEQUB (vector compare equal unsigned byte), which sets CR bits to indicate all-zero vectors or per-element equality in 128-bit vector scalar registers (VR0-VR31), enabling SIMD conditional flow without a separate ZF while leveraging the scalar CR's equality bit (CR0) for hybrid operations.

References

CSCI 2400 - Computer Architecture

Condition Codes 1: Condition Flags and Codes - Arm Developer

x86 Architecture - Windows drivers | Microsoft Learn

MIPS - Alan Clements

 Intel Quark SoC X1000 Core Developer's Manual

Program Status Registers (PSRs) - Arm Developer

APSR: Application Program Status Register - Arm Developer

Conditional execution - Arm Developer

 Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer's Manual

https://developer.arm.com/documentation/dui0068/b/the-cortex-m3-processor/about-the-processor/processor-core-registers/program-status-registers-psr-/application-program-status-register-apsr

 Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer's Manual

CPSR: Current Program Status Register - Arm Developer

NZCV: Condition Flags - Arm A-profile Architecture Registers

Updates to the condition flags - Arm Developer

Conditional execution - Arm Developer

 The ARM Scalable Vector Extension - Alastair Reid

 An Instruction Level Energy Characterization of ARM Processors

 ARM Architecture Reference Manual Thumb-2 Supplement

 6502.pdf

 6502 User's Manual - Retro Computing

 pdp11-40.pdf - PDOS-MIT

https://bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/pdp11/handbooks/DEC-11-HR6A-D_PDP-11_Conventions_197009.pdf

 VAX Architecture Reference Manual

https://bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/vax/archSpec/EK-VAXAR-RM-001_Arch_May82.pdf

 Motorola M68000 Family Programmer's Reference Manual

 M68000 8-/16-/32-bit microprocessors user's manual

 MIPS IV Instruction Set

 The SPARC Architecture Manual

 The SPARC Architecture Manual

 PowerPC User Instruction Set Architecture Book I Version 2.01

https://cdrdv2.intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/671110

8 - CS 131/CSCI 1310: Fundamentals of Computer Systems

ADD, SUB, RSB, ADC, SBC, and RSC - Arm Developer

 tel INTEL CORP . 1974 - Bitsavers.org

 intel-8085_datasheet.pdf

 intel-8086_datasheet.pdf

 CP/M Assembly Language Programming - Bitsavers.org

None

 MIPS R4000 Microprocessor User's Manual

 AltiVec Technology Programming Environments Manual
 
Table of Contents
 

 
Sign in to contribute
 
Create an account or sign in to suggest articles and edits to Grokipedia.
 
Sign in
 
Suggest an article
 
Know something the world should know? Tell us what to write about.
 New Article Suggest Edit Topic (optional if you add details) Details (optional if you add a topic) 
What makes a great suggestion?
 
Specific beats broad "CRISPR" over "Biology"
 
People, events, and breakthroughs are ideal
 
Search first to check if it already exists
 Cancel Submit Summary Edit content (optional) Supporting sources (optional) 
Add another source
 
What makes a great edit?
 
Select the wrong text in the article first
 
Add a source link so we can verify
 
One fix per submission is easiest to review
 Cancel Submit Edit 

 
Something went wrong
 
We couldn't submit your suggestion. Please try again.
 
Try again
 
Thank you!
 
Grok will review your suggestion and add the article if it sees fit.
 
View my suggestions
 
Submit another suggestion